---
title: "AZ 900 Study Guide Part 1"
description: "Cloud Concepts"
date: 2022-12-12T18:04:05-04:00
lang: en
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["Azure"]
---

## Describe Cloud Computing

Define cloud computing.

- Cloud computing is the delivery of computing services over the Internet.
- Infrastructure: virtual machines, storage, databases, and networking
- Expanded services: IoT, ML, AI

[Describe the shared responsibility model.](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/wwl-azure/describe-cloud-compute/media/shared-responsibility-b3829bfe.svg)

- You’ll always be responsible for:
  - The information and data stored in the cloud
  - Devices that are allowed to connect to your cloud (cell phones, computers, and so on)
  - The accounts and identities of the people, services, and devices within your organization
- The cloud provider is always responsible for:
  - The physical datacenter
  - The physical network
  - The physical hosts

Define cloud models, including public, private, and hybrid.

- Public: built, controlled, and maintained by a third party provider.
- Private: corporate datacenter either hosted onsite or offsite.
- Hybrid: combine private and public clouds
  - Provides the most flexibility
  - Org determines where to run their apps
  - Org control security, compliance, and legal requirements
- Multi-cloud: multiple public cloud providers
- Azure Arc: technologies to help manage your cloud environment regardless of location
- Azure VMware Solution: run vmware workloads in Azure

Capex versus Opex

- Capex: one-time, up-front purchase of tangible resources
- Opex: spending money on services or products over time

Describe the consumption-based model.

- No upfront costs.
- No need to purchase and manage costly infrastructure that users might not use to its fullest potential.
- The ability to pay for more resources when they're needed.
- The ability to stop paying for resources that are no longer needed.

## Describe benefits of using cloud services

Describe the benefits of high availability and scalability in the cloud.

- High availability focuses on ensuring maximum availability, regardless of disruptions or events that may occur.
- SLA: formal agreement between provider and customer outline service expectations
- Scalability refers to the ability to adjust resources to meet demand.
- Scaling generally comes in two varieties: vertical and horizontal.
  - Vertical (up): adding cpu and ram to a vm
  - Horizontal (out): adding more vms or containers

Describe the benefits of reliability and predictability in the cloud.

- Reliability is the ability of a system to recover from failures and continue to function.
- Predictability can be focused on performance predictability or cost predictability.
  - Performance: predicting the resources needed to deliver a positive experience for your customers. (Autoscaling, load balancing, HA)
  - Cost: predicting or forecasting the cost of the cloud spend. (TCO, pricing calculator)

Describe the benefits of security and governance in the cloud.

- Set templates help ensure that all your deployed resources meet corporate standards and government regulatory requirements.
- Cloud providers are typically well suited to handle things like distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks.
- IaaS provides you with physical resources but lets you manage the operating systems and installed software (patches and maintenance).
- PaaS and SaaS takes care of patches and maintenance for you.

Describe the benefits of manageability in the cloud.

- Management of the cloud:
  - Automatically scale resource deployment based on need.
  - Deploy resources based on a preconfigured template, removing the need for manual configuration.
  - Monitor the health of resources and automatically replace failing resources.
  - Receive automatic alerts based on configured metrics, so you’re aware of performance in real time.
- Management in the cloud:
  - Web portal
  - CLI
  - API
  - PowerShell

## Describe cloud service types

Describe Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS).

- Renting the hardware
- You're responsible for everything else: OS installation, configuration, maintenance, network configuration, db and storage configuration, etc.
- Use cases:
  - Lift-and-shift migration: create cloud resources that are similar to on-prem then switch over
  - Testing and development: stand up and shutdown dev environments rapidly while using established configurations

Describe Platform as a Service (PaaS).

- a middle ground between renting space in a datacenter (IaaS) and paying for a complete and deployed solution (SaaS).
- provide a complete development environment without the headache of maintaining all the development infrastructure.
- Use cases:
  - Development framework: create an app using built-in components
  - Analytics or business intelligence: analyze and mine their data, finding insights and patterns and predicting outcomes to improve forecasting, product design decisions, investment returns, and other business decisions.

Describe Software as a Service (SaaS).

- renting or using a fully developed application
- Email, financial software, messaging applications, and connectivity software are all common examples
- Use cases:
  - Email and messaging.
  - Business productivity applications.
  - Finance and expense tracking.
