---
title: "AZ 900 Study Guide Part 3"
description: "Management and Governance"
date: 2022-12-12 08:00:00 -0400
lang: en
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["Cloud"]
---

## Describe cost management in Azure

Describe factors that can affect costs in Azure.

- CapEx: building out and maintaining infrastructure
- OpEx: renting infrastructure as you need it
- Impacting factors:
  - Resource type
  - Consumption
  - Maintenance
  - Geography
  - Subscription type
  - Azure Marketplace

Compare the Pricing calculator and Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) calculator.

- Pricing calculator: build out a solution and receive an estimate
- TCO calculator: compare the costs of running an on-prem solution versus in Azure

Describe Azure Cost Management Tool.

- Cost Management provides the ability to
  - quickly check Azure resource costs
  - create alerts based on resource spend
  - create budgets that can be used to automate management of resources
- Cost analysis is a subset of Cost Management that provides a quick visual for your Azure costs
- Cost alerts: a single location to check on alerts that may show up in the Cost Management service.
- Types of alerts:
  - Budget alerts
  - Credit alerts
  - Department spending quota alerts

Describe the purpose of tags.

- Tags provide extra information, or metadata, about your resources.
- Useful for:
  - Resource management
  - Cost management and optimization
  - Operations management
  - Security
  - Governance and regulatory compliance
  - Workload optimization and automation
- Example tagging structure:
  - AppName: The name of the application that the resource is part of.
  - CostCenter: The internal cost center code.
  - Owner: The name of the business owner who's responsible for the resource.
  - Environment: An environment name, such as "Prod," "Dev," or "Test."
  - Impact: ow important the resource is to business operations, such as "Mission-critical," "High-impact," or "Low-impact."

## Describe features and tools in Azure for governance and compliance

Describe the purpose of Azure Blueprints

- Azure Blueprints: standardize cloud subscription or environment deployments.
- Instead of having to configure features like Azure Policy for each new subscription, you can define settings and policies that are applied as new subscriptions are created.
- Each component in the blueprint definition is known as an artifact.
- Azure Blueprint Artifacts can be valid without any parameters.
- Artifacts can include things such as:
  - Role assignments
  - Policy assignments
  - Azure Resource Manager templates
  - Resource groups

Describe the purpose of Azure Policy

- Azure Policy is a service in Azure that enables you to create, assign, and manage policies that control or audit your resources.
- You can define individual policies or groups of policies (initiatives)
- Can prevent noncompliant resources from being created
- the Enable Monitoring initiative in Azure Security Center initiative contains over 100 separate policy definitions

Describe the purpose of resource locks

- A resource lock prevents resources from being accidentally deleted or changed.
- There are two types of resource locks:
  - prevent users from deleting a resource.
  - prevent users from changing a resource.
- Go to the Settings section of any resource's Settings pane in the Azure portal

Describe the purpose of the Service Trust portal

- <https://servicetrust.microsoft.com>
- Provides access to various content, tools, and other resources about Microsoft security, privacy, and compliance practices

## Describe features and tools for managing and deploying Azure resources

Describe Azure portal

- The environment in which you interact with Azure. It includes the web portal, powershell, and CLI (bash)

Describe the purpose of Azure Arc

- Using ARM, extend Azure compliance and monitoring to on-prem and multi-cloud environments
- You can manage the following resource types:
  - Servers
  - Kubernetes clusters
  - Azure data services
  - SQL Server
  - Virtual machines (preview)

Describe Azure Resource Manager (ARM) and Azure ARM templates

- Azure Resource Manager (ARM) is the deployment and management service for Azure.
- create, update, and delete resources in your Azure account

Arm Templates

- describe the resources you want to use in a declarative JSON format
- code is verified before run
- The template then orchestrates the creation of those resources in parallel

Arm Template Benefits:

- Declarative syntax
- Repeatable results
- Orchestration
- Modular files
- Extensibility

## Describe monitoring tools in Azure

Describe the purpose of Azure Advisor

- Azure Advisor evaluates your Azure resources and makes recommendations to help improve reliability, security, and performance, achieve operational excellence, and reduce costs.
- The recommendation service includes suggested actions you can take right away, postpone, or dismiss.
- 5 categories for recommendations:
  - Reliability is used to ensure and improve the continuity of your business-critical applications.
  - Security is used to detect threats and vulnerabilities that might lead to security breaches.
  - Performance is used to improve the speed of your applications.
  - Operational Excellence is used to help you achieve process and workflow efficiency, resource manageability, and deployment best practices.
  - Cost is used to optimize and reduce your overall Azure spending.

Describe Azure Service Health

- Provides a complete view of the health of resources
- 3 components
  - Azure status: status of azure globally
  - Service health: status of services and regions
  - Resource health: status of your resources

Describe Azure Monitor, including Azure Log Analytics, Azure Monitor Alerts, and Application Insights

- Azure Monitor is a platform for collecting data on your resources, analyzing that data, visualizing the information, and even acting on the results.
- Azure Log Analytics is the tool in the Azure portal where you’ll write and run log queries on the data gathered by Azure Monitor.
- Azure Monitor Alerts are an automated way to detect a threshold being crossed.
- You set the alert conditions, the notification actions, and then it notifies when an alert is triggered.
- Application insights monitors web applications.
- It monitors things such as:
  - Request rates, response times, and failure rates
  - Dependency rates, response times, and failure rates, to show whether external services are slowing down performance
  - Page views and load performance reported by users' browsers
  - AJAX calls from web pages, including rates, response times, and failure rates
  - User and session counts
  - Performance counters from Windows or Linux server machines, such as CPU, memory, and network usage
