---
title: "AZ 900 Study Guide Part 2"
description: "Architecture and Services"
date: 2022-12-12 08:00:00 -0400
lang: en
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["Cloud"]
---

## Describe the core architectural components of Azure

Describe Azure regions, region pairs, and sovereign regions

- A region is a geographical area on the planet that contains at least one, but potentially multiple datacenters that are nearby and networked together with a low-latency network.
- Most Azure regions are paired with another region within the same geography (such as US, Europe, or Asia) at least 300 miles away.
- This approach allows for the replication of resources across a geography that helps reduce the likelihood of interruptions because of events such as natural disasters, civil unrest, power outages, or physical network outages that affect an entire region.
- Examples of region pairs in Azure are West US paired with East US and South-East Asia paired with East Asia.
- Sovereign regions are instances of Azure that are isolated from the main instance of Azure.
  - US DoD Central, US Gov Virginia, US Gov Iowa and more
  - China East, China North, and more

Describe Availability Zones

- Availability zones are physically separate datacenters within an Azure region.
- Azure services that support availability zones fall into three categories:
  - Zonal services: You pin the resource to a specific zone (for example, VMs, managed disks, IP addresses).
  - Zone-redundant services: The platform replicates automatically across zones (for example, zone-redundant storage, SQL Database).
  - Non-regional services: Services are always available from Azure geographies and are resilient to zone-wide outages as well as region-wide outages.
- Each availability zone is made up of one or more datacenters equipped with independent power, cooling, and networking.

Describe Azure resources and Resource Groups

- Anything you create, provision, deploy, etc. is a resource.
- Virtual Machines (VMs), virtual networks, databases, cognitive services, etc. are all considered resources within Azure.
- Resource groups are simply groupings of resources.
- a single resource can only be in one resource group at a time.
- When you apply an action to a resource group, that action will apply to all the resources within the resource group.
- If you delete a resource group, all the resources will be deleted.

Describe subscriptions

- Subscriptions are a unit of management, billing, and scale
- Subscription boundaries (2 types):
  - Billing
  - Access control
- You may want to create additional subscriptions to organize: environments (prod, dev, staging), organizational structures, and billing

Describe management groups

- Azure management groups provide a level of scope above subscriptions.
- You organize subscriptions into containers called management groups and apply governance conditions.
- All subscriptions within a management group automatically inherit the conditions applied to the management group.
- 10,000 management groups can be supported in a single directory.
- A management group tree can support up to six levels of depth. This limit doesn't include the root level or the subscription level.
- Each management group and subscription can support only one parent.

## Describe Azure compute and networking services

Compare compute types, including container instances, virtual machines, and functions.

- Containers are a standard unit of software that packages up code and all its dependencies so the application runs quickly and reliably from one computing environment to another.
- Azure Container Instances: PaaS, upload your containers and then the service will run the containers for you.
- Virtual Machines: IaaS, software emulating a computer
  - Total control over the operating system (OS).
  - The ability to run custom software.
  - To use custom hosting configurations.
- Functions:  event-driven, serverless compute option that doesn’t require maintaining virtual machines or containers
- Used when you need to perform work in response to an event (often via a REST request), timer, or message from another Azure service
- Functions can be either stateless or stateful.
  - stateless (the default), they behave as if they're restarted every time they respond to an event.
  - stateful (called Durable Functions), a context is passed through the function to track prior activity.

Describe virtual machine options, including virtual machines (VMs), virtual machine scale sets, virtual machine availability sets, and Azure Virtual Desktop.

- Scale Sets: create and manage a group of identical, load-balanced VMs
- Availability Sets: ensure that VMs stagger updates and have varied power and network connectivity, preventing you from losing all your VMs with a single network or power failure.
  - Group VMs in two ways: update domain and fault domain
  - Update domain: group of vms that can be rebooted at the same time
  - Fault domain: group of vms by common power source and network switch
- When to use VMs:
  - During testing and development
  - When running applications in the cloud
  - When extending your datacenter to the cloud
  - During disaster recovery
- Azure Virtual Desktop (AVD)
  - a desktop and application virtualization service that runs on the cloud
  - Cloud-hosted version of Windows from any location via remote desktop or web browser
  - Supports RBACs and MFA for security
  - Windows 10 or 11 Enterprise multi-session enables multiple concurrent users on a single VM

Describe resources required for virtual machines.

- Size (purpose, number of processor cores, and amount of RAM)
- Storage disks (hard disk drives, solid state drives, etc.)
- Networking (virtual network, public IP address, and port configuration)

Describe application hosting options, including Azure Web Apps.

- Azure App Service is an HTTP-based service for hosting web applications, REST APIs, and mobile back ends.
  - Web apps
  - API apps
  - WebJobs
  - Mobile apps

Describe virtual networking, including the purpose of Azure Virtual Networks, Azure virtual subnets, peering, Azure DNS, VPN Gateway, and ExpressRoute.

- Azure Virtual Networks: an extension of your on-premises network with resources that link other Azure resources
- The purpose of Azure Virtual Networks:
  - Isolation and segmentation
  - Internet communications
  - Communicate between Azure resources
  - Communicate with on-premises resources
  - Route network traffic
  - Filter network traffic
  - Connect virtual networks
- Point-to-site virtual private network connections are from a computer outside your organization back into your corporate network. In this case, the client computer initiates an encrypted VPN connection to connect to the Azure virtual network.
- Site-to-site virtual private networks link your on-premises VPN device or gateway to the Azure VPN gateway in a virtual network. In effect, the devices in Azure can appear as being on the local network. The connection is encrypted and works over the internet.
- Azure ExpressRoute provides a dedicated private connectivity to Azure that doesn't travel over the internet. ExpressRoute is useful for environments where you need greater bandwidth and even higher levels of security.
- Route tables allow you to define rules about how traffic should be directed. You can create custom route tables that control how packets are routed between subnets.
- Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) works with Azure VPN gateways, Azure Route Server, or Azure ExpressRoute to propagate on-premises BGP routes to Azure virtual networks.
- Network security groups are Azure resources that can contain multiple inbound and outbound security rules. You can define these rules to allow or block traffic, based on factors such as source and destination IP address, port, and protocol.
- A network virtual appliance carries out a particular network function, such as running a firewall or performing wide area network (WAN) optimization.
- VPN Gateways
  - Connect on-premises datacenters to virtual networks through a site-to-site connection.
  - Connect individual devices to virtual networks through a point-to-site connection.
  - Connect virtual networks to other virtual networks through a network-to-network connection.
- Two types of VPN Gateways
  - Policy-based VPN gateways: specify statically the IP address of packets that should be encrypted through each tunnel.
  - In Route-based gateways: IPSec tunnels are modeled as a network interface or virtual tunnel interface.
- VPN HA Scenarios:
  - Active/Standby: default, VPN gateways are always deployed as two instances
  - Active/Active: assign a unique public IP to each instance and create separate tunnels from on-prem devices to each IP
  - ExpressRoute failover: vpn gateway that uses the internet as an alternative method of connectivity
  - Zone-redundant gateways: region protection
ExpressRoute Models:
- CloudExchange colocation: corporate datacenter is located at an ISP
- Point-to-point Ethernet connection
- Any-to-any connection: WAN connection between azure, dc, and branch offices
- Directly from ExpressRoute sites: connect to MS global network from a peering location
Azure DNS:
- a hosting service for DNS domains that provides name resolution by using Microsoft Azure infrastructure.
- You can use an alias record set to refer to an Azure resource, such as an Azure public IP address, an Azure Traffic Manager profile, or an Azure Content Delivery Network (CDN) endpoint.

Define public and private endpoints.

- Public endpoints have a public IP address and can be accessed from anywhere in the world.
- Private endpoints exist within a virtual network and have a private IP address from within the address space of that virtual network.

## Describe Azure storage services

Compare Azure storage services.

- Azure Blobs: A massively scalable object store for text and binary data. Also includes support for big data analytics through Data Lake Storage Gen2.
- Azure Files: Managed file shares for cloud or on-premises deployments.
- Azure Queues: A messaging store for reliable messaging between application components.
- Azure Disks: Block-level storage volumes for Azure VMs.

Describe storage tiers.

- Hot: Optimized for storing data that is accessed frequently (for example, images for your website).
- Cool: Optimized for data that is infrequently accessed and stored for at least 30 days (for example, invoices for your customers).
- Archive: Appropriate for data that is rarely accessed and stored for at least 180 days, with flexible latency requirements (for example, long-term backups).

Describe redundancy options.

- Locally redundant storage (LRS)
- Geo-redundant storage (GRS)
- Read-access geo-redundant storage (RA-GRS)
- Zone-redundant storage (ZRS)
- Geo-zone-redundant storage (GZRS)
- Read-access geo-zone-redundant storage (RA-GZRS)

Describe storage account options and storage types.

- Standard general-purpose v2: Standard storage account type for blobs, file shares, queues, and tables.
- Premium block blobs: Premium storage account type for block blobs and append blobs.
- Premium file shares: Premium storage account type for file shares only.
- Premium page blobs: Premium storage account type for page blobs only.

Identify options for moving files, including AzCopy, Azure Storage Explorer, and Azure File Sync.

- AzCopy is a command-line utility that you can use to copy blobs or files to or from your storage account.
- AzCopy is a one-way sync
- Azure Storage Explorer is a standalone app that provides a gui to manage files and blobs in your Azure Storage Account.

Describe migration options, including Azure Migrate and Azure Data Box.

- Azure Migrate: Single portal to start/run/track migrations
- Tools included:
  - Azure Migrate: Discovery and assessment. Discover and assess on-premises servers running on VMware, Hyper-V, and physical servers in preparation for migration to Azure.
  - Azure Migrate: Server Migration. Migrate VMware VMs, Hyper-V VMs, physical servers, other virtualized servers, and public cloud VMs to Azure.
  - Data Migration Assistant. Data Migration Assistant is a stand-alone tool to assess SQL Servers. It helps pinpoint potential problems blocking migration. It identifies unsupported features, new features that can benefit you after migration, and the right path for database migration.
  - Azure Database Migration Service. Migrate on-premises databases to Azure VMs running SQL Server, Azure SQL Database, or SQL Managed Instances.
  - Web app migration assistant. Azure App Service Migration Assistant is a standalone tool to assess on-premises websites for migration to Azure App Service. Use Migration Assistant to migrate .NET and PHP web apps to Azure.
- Azure Data Box: 80TB storage box is shipped to you. Good for data transfers > 40 TB and limited network connectivity.
- Azure Data Box Use Cases:
  - Onetime migration - when a large amount of on-premises data is moved to Azure.
  - Moving a media library from offline tapes into Azure to create an online media library.
  - Migrating your VM farm, SQL server, and applications to Azure.
  - Moving historical data to Azure for in-depth analysis and reporting using HDInsight.
  - Initial bulk transfer - when an initial bulk transfer is done using Data Box (seed) followed by incremental transfers over the network.
  - Periodic uploads - when large amount of data is generated periodically and needs to be moved to Azure.
- Azure File Sync: enhances windows file server capabilities to Azure with bidirectional sync and multiple supported protocols (smb, nfs, ftps)

## Describe Azure identity, access, and security

Describe directory services in Azure, including Azure Active Directory (AD) and Azure AD DS.

- Azure AD is a directory service that allows you to sign in to cloud applications.
- It can help manage your on-premises AD
- It allows you to monitor sign-in attempts

Who uses Azure AD:

- IT Admins: Identity and Access management
- App Devs: App authentication API and SSO
- Users: Self-service, Sign in
- Online Services: Office 365

Azure AD features:

- Authentication
- SSO
- App Management: Application Proxy, SaaS apps, My Apps portal
- Device Management: Conditional access policies, device registration

You can connect an on-premises AD to Azure AD using Azure AD Connect.

Azure AD DS

- A service that provides managed domain services such as domain join, group policy, ldap, and kerberos/ntlm authentication.
- Allows you to run legacy apps that don't support modern authentication in the cloud

Describe authentication methods in Azure, including single sign-on (SSO), multifactor authentication (MFA), and passwordless.

- Authentication means verifying identity. This can be for a person, service, or device.
- Azure supported authentication methods: password, MFA, SSO, passwordless
- SSO: sign in once and use those credentials in other resources
- MFA: phone call or app notification in addition to password sign in
- Passwordless: windows hello, microsoft authenticator ap, FIDO2 security keys

Describe external identities and guest access in Azure.

- External identities are a person, service, or device outside of your organization
- The external identity uses their own identity service (Azure, Facebook, Google, etc) to handle verification. You manage the access once they are signed into your tenant.
- Capabilities of external identities:
  - B2B collaboration: guest users that use their identity service to sign into your application.
  - B2B direct connect: two way trust with another azure ad organization
  - B2C (Azure AD business to customer): Azure AD handles the identity and access management for apps that customers sign into

Describe Azure AD Conditional Access.

- Conditional Access is a tool that Azure Active Directory uses to allow (or deny) access to resources based on identity signals.
- These signals include who the user is, where the user is, and what device the user is requesting access from.
- Allows more granular MFA control. For example, no MFA needed from a secure location.

Describe Azure Role Based Access Control (RBAC).

- Azure RBAC consists of creating roles, the access levels attached to that role, and the users that then get added to that role in order to ensure that the principle of least privilege is applied, without the administrative overhead of constantly defining individual rules.
- When you grant access at a parent scope, those permissions are inherited by all child scopes.
- Azure RBAC uses an allow model. Example: You have read access to resource 'a' via group 1. You have write access to resource 'a' via group 2. Therefore, you have read and write access to resource 'a'.

Scope can include:

- Management group
- Subscription
- Resource Group
- Resource

Describe the concept of Zero Trust.

- Zero Trust assumes breach at the outset, and then verifies each request as though it originated from an uncontrolled network.

Describe the purpose of the defense in depth model.

- Defense in depth is a model using a series of layers to plan the protection of data.

The defense in depth layers include:

- The physical security layer is the first line of defense to protect computing hardware in the datacenter.
- The identity and access layer controls access to infrastructure and change control.
- The perimeter layer uses distributed denial of service (DDoS) protection to filter large-scale attacks before they can cause a denial of service for users.
- The network layer limits communication between resources through segmentation and access controls.
- The compute layer secures access to virtual machines.
- The application layer helps ensure that applications are secure and free of security vulnerabilities.
- The data layer controls access to business and customer data that you need to protect.

Describe the purpose of Microsoft Defender for Cloud.

- Defender for Cloud is a monitoring tool for security posture management and threat protection.
- It monitors your cloud, on-premises, hybrid, and multicloud environments to provide guidance and notifications aimed at strengthening your security posture.
