---
title: "DevOps Foundations 2"
description: "Basic Devops Theory"
date: 2023-01-02T18:04:05-04:00
lang: en
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["DevOps"]
---

This is the second of five courses that establishes a foundational knowledge of DevOps theories.

## Continuous Integration and Continuous Delivery

DevOps core concept: CI/CD

- Continuous integration: the practice of automatically building and unit testing an entire application frequently, ideally on every source code check-in.
- Continuous delivery: the practice of deploying every build to a production-like environment and performing automated integration and acceptance testing

Benefits of continuous delivery

1. Empowering Teams
2. Lowered Cycle Times
3. Better Security
4. Rhythm of Practice
5. More Time to Be Productive

Build pipelines in practice

- A build pipeline is your sequence of operations, and the tools that perform them, between your source code and your deployed system.

## Build Your Own Pipeline

Version Control

- Version control contains all the source code for your project and maintains the current and historical state of the code.
- Always use and put all code projects in version control.
- Commit often.
- Use easy-to-understand commit messages.
- Don't commit broken code.
- Consider using a master branch approach. Developing off trunk or master generally offers better performance.
- Commit hooks enforce quality.
- Be careful with secrets.
- Example git commands
  - ``git clone git@github.com:username/reponame.git`` create a local copy of a remote git repo
  - ``git log`` show all commits that have happened
  - ``git show <commit ID>`` Shows the commit messages and changes in red/green
  - ``git status`` show modified files
  - ``git diff`` show the changes of those files
  - ``git add .`` stage the changed files for the next commit
  - ``git commit -m "Message"`` commit the change and add a description
  - ``git push`` push the changes to the remote repo

Continuous Integration Systems

- Options: Open source, Commercial, SaaS
- Jenkins is a popular free and open source CI solution
- Best Practices:
  - Start with a clean environment
  - Build to pass "the coffee test" (from code commit to results in ~5 min.)
  - Use notifications to update your build progress
- CI Culture
  - Run tests locally before committing
  - Don't commit new code to broken builds
  - Don't leave the build broken
  - Don't remove tests that fail

Artifacts

- An artifact is packaged code that has been tested
- Benefits: reliability, composability, security, and shareability
- Planning artifacts: consider packaging format, dependency management, and the artifact repo
- A popular solution for artifact management is nexus repository manager oss 3.x

Continuous Testing

- Fast, reliable, and isolate failures
- Types of testing
  - unit: performed at build time on a single unit of code and/or artifact without use of external dependencies or deployment
  - integration: testing performed to expose defects in the interfaces and in the interactions between integrated components or systems.
  - ui: performed to exercise the full flow of your application in the same way an end user would
  - security: performed to look for flaws in your code and runtime to prevent compromises and leaking of data in production
- Shift left: move testing as early as possible in the development process, ideally to the dev desktop
- Test fixture: a set of objects used to run a test in a well-known environment
- System under test (SUT): the app and system on which you are running your tests
- Cycle time: the time from when an item (feature or bug fix) is worked on until it is delivered into production
- Lead time: the time taken from when an item is requested until it is delivered into production
- Mock: code designed to stand in for a piece of code that contains external dependencies to enable unit tests

Testing Philosophy

- Test-driven development (TDD): the practice of writing a failing test first, and then writing the code that causes the test to pass
- Behavior-driven development (BDD): the practice of writing tests in a simple end-user-behavior-centric language
- Acceptance test-driven development: the practice of agreeing on acceptance tests before development to establish what is to be delivered

The Big Three Testing Metrics

- Cycle time: time from the start of work to delivery
- Velocity: value delivered per unit time
- Customer satisfaction: how well a product/service met the customer's needs. NPS scores and bug reports work well here.

Self-Service Deployment

- Deploy with: the same artifact, the same way, similar environments, the same smoke tests
- Separate deploy and release: blue/green deployments, feature flags
- Deployment tools: No clear answer, depends on what you're making; usesource pulls, cm systems, orchestration push, build
- Product update deploys to customer example: debian container > update server > puppet installation in rundeck orchestration server
- Ansible is a popular deployment tool

UI Testing

- More complete testing, but slow, manual, and requires maintenance
- Regression testing: a test conducted to verify that software which was previously developed and tested still performs the same way after it is changed or interfaced with other software.
- Acceptance testing: a test conducted to determine if the requirements of a specification or contract are met
- End-to-End testing: testing an application's workflow from beginning to end
- Popular tools include Selenium and Robot Framework

Dynamic Testing

- Pros: test actual attack payloads, collaboration between developers, security, and operations
- Cons: requires the system to be running, can be slow

## Putting it all together

Best Practices

- Each developer is responsible for their check-in through deployment.
- Small changes. Build quality in.
- Don't check in broken builds.
- Immediately address a broken build
- Revert if fixing takes time
- Automate high-quality testing.
- Run tests locally before check-in.
- Don't ignore or disable tests and fix flaky tests.
- Keep the build and deploy fast

Real world challenges

- Create the desire for your team to learn CI and CD instead of immediately focusing on tools and training.
- Builds are not reliable. Usually the result of bad testing.
- Quality goes down. Testing is the heart of CI/CD
- Deploys take a long time. Address deploy time issues or people will revert back to infrequent, large changes.
