---
title: "Decoupling Applications with AWS Services"
date: 2023-08-23T18:04:05-04:00
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["AWS"]
---

Decoupling Applications

## Introduction

When we start deploying multiple applications, they will inevitably need to communicate with one another.

There are two patterns of application communication

- Synchronous communications (application to application)
- Asynchronous communications (application to queue to application)

Synchronous communications between applications can be problematic if there are sudden spikes of traffic.

In those situations you can decouple with the following services

- SQS: queue model
- SNS: pub/sub model
- Kinesis: real-time streaming model

These services can scale indepedently from our application.

## Amazon SQS

SQS is a fully managed queue service, used to decouple applications.

One or more producers send messages to a queue and then one or more consumers pull the messages (polling). Polled messages are then processed and deleted from the queue.

There are two options when creating a queue: Standard and FIFO

Attributes of SQS

- Unlimited throughput, unlimited number of messsages in queue
- Default retention of messages: 4 days, max of 14 days
- Low latency: less than 10 ms on publish and receive
- Limitation of 256KB per message sent
- Can have duplicate messages
- Can have out of order messages

SQS with Auto Scaling Group (ASG)

- EC2 instances part of an ASG can poll for messages
- CloudWatch can monitor the queue length using `ApproximateNumberOfMessages`
- CloudWatch can have an alarm that triggers on a number of messages, which then scales the ASG
- Good to use as a buffer to database writes

SQS to decouple between application tiers

- Requests come in to an auto-scaling front-end web app
- `SendMessage` to an SQS Queue
- `ReceiveMessages` to back-end processing application (for example video processing)
- Insert to an S3 bucket.

SQS Security

- In-flight encryption using HTTPS API
- At-rest encryption using KMS keys
- Client-side encryption/decryption if the customer performs it
- IAM policies regulate access to the SQS API
- SQS Access Policies (similar to S3 bucket policies) are useful for cross-account access to SQS and for allowing other services to write to an SQS queue (such as SNS and S3).

Message Visibility Timeout

- After a message is polled by a consumer, it becomes invisible to other consumers.
- Default timeout is 30 seconds on SQS
- If a message is not processed within the visibility timeout, it will be processed twice.
- A consumer could call the `ChangeMessageVisibility` API to get more time.
- If visibility timeout is high (hours), and consumer crashes, re-processing will take time.
- If visibility timeout is too low (seconds), we may get duplicates.

SQS Long Polling

- When a consumer requests messages from the queue, it can optionally "wait" for messages to arrive if there are none in the queue (long polling).
- This decreases latency and reduces the number of API calls.
- The wait time can be between 1 second and 20 (longer is preferred).
- Long polling can be enabled at the queue level or at the API level using `WaitTimeSeconds`.

SQS - FIFO Queue

- First In First Out (FIFO) orders the messages in the queue.
- Limited throughput: 300 msg/s without batching, 3k msg/s with
- Exactly-once send capability (by removing duplicates)
- Messages are processed in order by the consumer
- Queue name must end in `.fifo` during creation

## Amazon SNS

- One message to many receivers
- Uses a publisher/subscriber pattern. Many receivers subscribe to a publisher.
- The event producer only sends message to one SNS topic.
- As many "event receivers" (subscriptions) as we want to listen to the SNS topic notifications
- Each subscriber to the topic will get all the messages (note: new feature to filter messages)
- Up to 12,500,000 subscriptions per topic
- 100,000 topics limit
- SNS can send to: email, sms, https endpoints, sqs, lambda, kinesis data firehose
- SNS can receive from: Cloudwatch alarms, budgets, ASG notifications, cloudformation state changes, DMS, lambda, dynamodb, rds events, etc.

SNS How to Publish

- Topic Publish:
  - Create a topic
  - Create a subscription(s)
  - Publish the topic
- Direct Publish:
  - Create a platform application
  - Create a platform endpoint
  - Publish to the platform endpoint
  - Works with Google GCM, Apple APNS, Amazon ADM

SNS Security

- In-flight encryption using HTTPS API
- At-rest encryption using KMS keys
- Client-side encryption if the client wants to perform encryption/decryption itself
- Access controls: IAM policies
- SNS Access policies: cross-account access to SNS, allow other services to write to an SNS topic

SNS + SQS Fan Out

- Push once in SNS, receive in all SQS queues that are subscribers
- Fully decoupled, no data loss
- SQS allows for: data persistence, delayed processing and retries of work
- Ability to add more SQS subscribers over time
- Make sure your SQS queue access policy allows for SNS to write
- Cross-Region Delivery: works with SQS queues in other regions
- When would you use this? One example is if you want to send the same S3 event to multiple queues.
- Another Example is using SNS to send to S3 through Kinesis Data Firehose

SNS Message Filtering

- JSON policy is used to filter messages sent to SNS topic's subscriptions
- For example, you create a filter policy for placed orders to a placed SNS queue and a cancelled filter to send messages to a cancelled SNS queue
- If a subscription doesn't have a filter policy, it receives every message.

## Amazon Kinesis

Kinesis Overview

- Makes it easy to collect, process, and analyze streaming data in real-time
- Ingest real-time data such as: application logs, metrics, website clickstreams, IoT telemetry data, etc.

There are four services within Kinesis

- Kinesis Data Streams: capture, process, and store data streams
- Kinesis Data Firehose: load data streams into AWS data stores
- Kinesis Data Analytics: analyze data streams with SQL or Apache Flink
- Kinesis Video Streams: capture, process, and store video streams

Kinesis Data Streams

- Streams consist of shards that are numbered and provisioned ahead of time
- KCL = Kinesis Client Library, KPL = Kinesis Producer Library
- Producers (apps, clients, sdk, kpl, kinesis agent) send records to shards
- Records consist of a partition key (tells which shard number to go to) and data blob (up to 1 MB)
- Shards then send another record to consumers (apps, lambda, kinesis data firehose or kinesis data analytics)
- That record consists of partition key, sequence number, and data blob
- Retention between 1 to 365 days
- Ability to reprocess data
- Once data is inserted in Kinesis, it can't be deleted (immutability)
- Data that shares the same partition goes to the same shard (ordering)
