---
title: "AWS Solutions Architect Part 3"
date: 2023-04-12T20:33:59-04:00
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["AWS"]
---

This is part 3 in a series of notes to help prepare for the AWS SAA-C03 exam. It covers information about monitoring, high availability, scaling, decoupling workflows, big data, serverless architecture, and security. Topics are covered at a high level. Use https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ for more information.

## Monitoring

**CloudWatch**

- A monitoring and observability platform that was designed to give us insight into our AWS architecture.
- Allows us to monitor multiple levels of our applications and identify potential issues.
- Monitor, store, and access logs from a variety of sources.
- System metrics: resource utilization on the OS
- App metrics: install an agent and receive metrics inside EC2 instances
- Alarms: notification when a metric exceeds a threshold
- Two types of metrics: 
    - default: no configuration require; CPU, network
    - custom: agent installed; EC2 memory utilization, EBS storage capacity
- You start with 0 alarms, you must create them.
- AWS can't see past the hypervisor level.
- Standard (5 min intervals)
- Detailed (1 min intervals)
- Managed services provide more checks out of the box.
- Cloudwatch key terms
    - Log event: record of what happened with a timestamp and data
    - Log stream: a collection of log events from the same source
    - Log group: a collection of log streams (e.g. all apache web server logs)
- Filter patterns: look for specific terms in your logs (such as 400 errors in web server logs)
- Cloudwatch Logs Insights: query all your logs using a SQL-like interactive solution
- Use Kinesis for a real-time logging service, not CloudWatch
- Alarms: create alerts on those trends

**Amazon Managed Prometheus/Grafana**

- AWS Grafana
    - Fully managed service for data visualization.
    - Allows instant querying, correlating, and visualizing of metrics, logs, and traces.
    - Built-in data sources: CloudWatch, Prometheus, X-Ray
    - Good for container or IoT metrics
- AWS Prometheus
    - Kubernetes-based metrics monitoring at scale.
    - Can be Amazon EKS clusters or self-managed Kubernetes clusters.
- Both services let AWS handle the HA and automatic scaling.
- Leverage VPC endpoints for secure VPC access.

**Exam Tips**

- Four types of questions:
    - What is the best tool to monitor with?
    - Is that metric available by default?
    - Where can I find those logs?
    - Do I need to adjust my alarm threshold?
- CloudWatch
    - The main tool for anything alarm related.
    - Not everything should go through CloudWatch (e.g. AWS standards are watched by AWS Config).
    - Know the intervals: 5 min = standard, 1 min = detailed.
    - EC2, on-prem, RDS, Lambda, and CloudTrail all integrate with CloudWatch Logs
- Grafana: visualize container metrics
- Prometheus: Kubernetes (Amazon EKS or self-managed) metrics at scale

**CloudWatch Logs Installer**

```bash
wget -O awslogs-agent-setup.py https://s3.amazonaws.com/aws-cloudwatch/downloads/latest/awslogs-agent-setup.py
sudo python ./awslogs-agent-setup.py --region us-east-1
```

## High Availability and Scaling

**Scaling decisions**

- What: What resources need to scale?
- Where: Where does it go? VPC, DB, Web servers, etc.
- When: What is the trigger to scale? CloudWatch alarms?

**Launch Templates are best practice**

- Use launch templates over launch configurations
- Launch configurations are immutable, only for autoscaling, and have limited options.
- Launch templates can be versioned.
- User-data is included.
- An AMI is required as well as EC2 instance size, security groups, and network information.

**Auto Scaling Steps**

1. Define your template
2. Networking and Purchasing (such as multi-AZ)
3. ELB Configuration: EC2 instances can be registered behind a load balancer and then use the LB health checks.
4. Set Scaling Policies: Min and Max
5. Notifications: SNS for when scaling occurs.

**Scaling Types**

- Reactive: Create the load, measure it, determine if more is needed.
- Scheduled: Create an event to have the resources deployed before they are needed.
- Predictive: AWS machine learning determines scaling. Reevaluates every 24 hrs, to plan for the next 48 hrs.

**Exam Tips**

- Scale out aggressively.
- Scale in conservatively.
- Create AMIs to reduce provisioning times.
- Use EC2 Reserved Instances for the minimum count for cost savings.
- Use CloudWatch to alert for autoscaling.

**Relational DB Scaling**

- Vertical Scaling: resize the db for performance
- Scaling Storage: storage usually only goes up
- Read Replicas: read-only copies to spread out workload
- Aurora Serverless: offload scaling to AWS

**Exam Tips**

- Refactoring and changing to DynamoDB is a viable scaling choice (in the exam at least).
- Always use read replicas for read-heavy workloads.
- RDS storage only scales up.
- Unless it's a dev environment, turn on multi-az.
- If the situation calls for a relational DB, prioritize AWS Aurora.

**DynamoDB Scaling**

- Provisioned capacity: for predictable workloads
- On-demand capacity: for sporadic workloads
- 24 hour cooldown when switching between Provisioned and On-demand
- Always consider costs when deciding between Provisioned and On-Demand.

## Decoupling Workflows

**Questions to ask yourself**

- Is it a synchronous or an asynchronous workload?
- What type of decoupling makes sense?
- Does the order of messages matter? (FIFO or Standard)
- What type of application load will you see? (Know the service limits)

**Decoupling Workflows**

- Loosely coupled means the loss of one node or job doesn't delay the entire workflow.
- Always look for loosely coupled solutions.
- Don't select answers with instance-to-instance communication.

**Amazon SQS**

- Simple Queue Service (SQS) allows asynchronous processing of work.
- One resource writes a message to a queue, then another resource retrieves that message.
- SQS can duplicate messages. This only happens once in a while.
- If duplication is consistent, check for a misconfigured visibility timeout or if the delete API call is failing.
- Queues are not bi-directional.
- If you need communication to return to the instance that sent the message, you'll need a second queue.
- Know the settings for SQS
    - Delivery Delay: default is 0; up to 15 min.
    - Message size: up to 256KB of text (any format)
    - Encryption: messages are encrypted in transit by default, and at-rest when configured.
    - Message Retention: default is 4 days; can be set between 1 min and 14 days
    - Polling: short polling is the default, but long polling is best practice
    - Queue Depth: trigger for autoscaling
    - Visibility timeout: locks a message while another resource processes it; will either return the message on fail, or delete the message on success.
- Messages stored in SQS can only persist up to 14 days.
- If ordering is important, select SQS FIFO queues.
    - Standard: SQS typically offers "best effort" ordering. Unlimited transactions per second.
    - FIFO: Guarantees ordering and no duplicates. 300 messages per second. More expensive.
    - Queue name must end in '.fifo'
- Dead-letter Queue (DLQ)
    - a queue to hold reject messages (that have failed retrieval and were returned)
    - Use DLQs and visibility timeout to deal with problem messages in SQS.
    - Setup a CloudWatch alarm to monitor queue depth.

**SNS**

- A push-based messaging service. It will proactively deliver notifications to the endpoints subscribed to it.
- Can be used to alert a system or person using CloudWatch.
- SNS settings:
    - Subscribers: kinesis data firehose, sqs, lambda, email, HTTP(s), SMS, platform application endpoint
    - Message size: up to 256 KB text any format
    - DQL support
    - FIFO or Standard
    - Encryption: encrypted in transit by default, at-rest when configured.
    - Resource policies can be applied to topics.
- Don't confuse this service with SES, which is for marketing emails.

**API Gateway**

- A fully managed service that allows you to easily publish, create, maintain, monitor, and secure your API.
- Puts a "front door" on your application.
- Security: allows you to attach a WAF
- DDoS protection and rate limiting
- Best practice is to use an API on custom built applications.
- Avoid hard coding access keys into your app.

**AWS Batch**

- Run batch computing workloads within AWS (EC2 or ECS/Fargate)
- Good for long-running and event-driven workloads (anything greater than 15 min)
- Supports queued workloads
- 4 Components:
    - Jobs: shell scripts, exe, docker images
    - Job Definitions: blueprint for the resources
    - Job Queues: holds submitted jobs in specific queues until the scheduled run time
    - Compute environment: the resources used to run the jobs.
- Best practice is to run Fargate to launch batch jobs.
- Sometimes EC2 is better:
    - Custom AMI is needed
    - vCPU requirements (more than 4 vCPUs)
    - Memory requirements (more than 30 GiB)
    - GPU or Graviton CPU
    - linuxParameters
    - Large number of jobs
- AWS Batch vs Lambda
    - Lambda has a 15 min execution time limit.
    - Lambda has limited disk space, and EFS requires functions live within a VPC
    - Lambda is fully serverless, but has limited runtimes.

**Amazon MQ**

- Managed messaging broker service
- Supports RabbitMQ or ActiveMQ
- Supported protocols: JMS, AMQP 0-9-1, AMQP 1.0, MQTT, OpenWire, STOMP
- SNS and SQS cannot handle those protocols.

**Step Functions**

- Serverless orchestration service
- Supports long-running workflows (up to 1 year)
- Good for if workflows have decision requirements (different states or logic)
    - Condition checks
    - Failure catches
    - Wait periods

**Amazon AppFlow**

- SaaS data ingestion
- When simplified data ingestion from external SaaS applications into AWS is required.
- Bi-directional (supports data into and out of AWS)

## Big Data

**Questions to ask**

- What kind of database works? Relational (RDS) or non-relational (DynamoDB)
- How much data do you have? Each service has limits.
- Is serverless a requirement?
- How do we optimize costs?

**Redshift**

- Fully managed, petabyte-scale (up to 16 PB) data warehouse service in AWS.
- A very large relational database traditionally used in big data applications.
- Good for BI applications.
- You don't use redshift in place of RDS.
- Single AZ deployments.
- Backups are retained for 1 day by default.

**Elastic MapReduce (EMR)**

- A managed big data platform that allows you to process vast amounts of data using open-source tools.
- Used to process and move data.
- Made up of EC2 instances.
- Supports: Spark, Hive, HBase, Flink, Hudi, and Presto.
- EC2 features can be used here, such as RIs and Spot Instances for cost savings.
- Lives in a VPC.
- Excels at ETL jobs (extract, transform, load)

**Kinesis**

- Ingest, process, and analyze real-time streaming data.
- The only service with real-time response.
- SQS and Kinesis can both act as queues
- Kinesis is faster and stores data up to a year, but SQS is easier and simpler.

**Misc Services**

- Serverless SQL means Athena. Also querying data stored in S3.
- Glue is serverless ETL. Used with Athena to create a schema.
- QuickSight is for visualizing data.
- OpenSearch analyzes log files and various documents. It integrates with CloudWatch.
- Amazon OpenSearch and Elasticsearch (predecessor) offer the same.

**Data Pipeline: ETL (extract, transform, load) service**

- Automate workflows and transform data
- Integrates with storage services RDS and S3, as well as compute services such as EC2 and EMR
- Data-driven and task-dependent

**Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK)**

- AWS managed service for building and running Apache Kafka streaming applications.
- The service handles control plane operations (creation, updating, deletion)
- You manage data plane operations.
- Push broker logs to CloudWatch, S3, or Kinesis Data Firehose.
- API calls are all logged to CloudTrail

## Serverless Architecture

**Benefits of Serverless**

- Ease of use: you only focus on the code
- Event based: can happen in response to events
- Billing model: pay as you go; you only pay for runtimes
- Lambda and Fargate are the two biggest AWS serverless services

**Lambda**

- Serverless compute service that lets you run code without provisioning or managing the underlying computers.
- Lambda Functions
    1. Runtime: the environment your code runs in
    2. Permissions: attaching a role to make an API call
    3. Networking: define your vpc, subnet, and security groups
    4. Resources: allocate how much CPU and RAM your code gets
    5. Trigger: alert your function to start
- Lambda allows you to "add" features to AWS, such as automatically removing entries from a security group, start and stop instances, etc.
- Lambda Quotas: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/gettingstarted-limits.html
- Supported runtimes: node.js, python, java, .net, go, ruby

**Serverless Application Repository**

- Allows users to easily find, deploy, or publish their own serverless apps.
- Can share privately or publicly
- Your code combined with a manifest file is known as the AWS SAM template.
- Integrated with Lambda
- Two options: Publish or Deploy
- Private by default

**Containers**

- A standard unit of software that packages up code and all its dependencies, so the application runs quickly and reliably from one computing environment to another.
- Dockerfile: text document that contains all the commands used to build an image.
- Image: immutable file that contains the code, libraries, dependencies, and configuration files needed to run an application.
- Registry: stores docker images; can be private or public
- Container: a running copy of the image.
- Containers can simplify the migration from on-prem to AWS.

**Elastic Container Service (ECS)**

- Management of containers at scale
- ELB integration
- Role integration
- Proprietary AWS
- Good for when you are all in on AWS and want simplicity

**Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS)**

- AWS-managed version of open-source Kubernetes.
- Good for when you need to support multiple platforms outside of AWS.
- More work to configure.
- ECS is usually preferred over EKS unless open-source and cross platform is needed.

**Fargate**

- A serverless compute engine for containers that works with both ECS and EKS
- AWS owns and manages infrastructure
- Fargate is a feature of ECS or EKS rather than its own service.
- EC2 vs. Fargate
    - Long-running containers = use EC2
    - EC2 has better cost saving options (RI, Spot Instances)
- Lambda vs. Fargate
    - Fargate is better for more consistent workloads
    - Lambda is better for unpredictable or inconsistent workloads
    - Fargate allows greater level of control
    - Perfect for applications that can be expressed as a single function

**EventBridge (aka CloudWatch Events)**

- A serverless event bus.
- Allows you to pass events from a source to an endpoint. Essentially, it's the glue that holds your serverless application together.
- Any API call can trigger a lambda function with EventBridge
- Creating a rule:
    - Define Pattern: invoked via event or schedule
    - Select Event Bus: is the event AWS-based, partner, or custom
    - Select Your Target: What is the action? Lambda function? Message to SQS? Email?
    - Tag: label your resources
    - Verify: Either wait for the event or manually create the event

**Elastic Container Registry (ECR)**

- AWS managed container image registry. Secure, scalable, reliable.
- Private container image repo with IAM permissions
- Supports Open Container Initiative (OCI), Docker images, and OCI artifacts
- Components:
    - Registry: private and provided to each AWS account
    - Authorization Token: required for pushing and pulling images
    - Repository: contains all of the images or artifacts
    - Policy: control access
    - Image: the items stored in repositories
- Lifecycle policy: manage images, cleanup unusued images, test
- Image scanning: identify software vulnerabilities
- Sharing: cross-region and cross account support (configured per region and per repo)
- Tag Mutability: prevents image tags from being overwritten

**Amazon EKS Distro (EKS-D)**

- The same as Amazon EKS but you manage it instead of AWS
- Runs on any platform.
- Good for self-managed Kubernetes deployments.

**Amazon EKS anywhere and ECS anywhere**

- Use Amazon practices while running on-premises.
- ECS anywhere requirements: SSM Agent, ECS agent, and Docker
- Must register SSM Managed Instances (can use install script)

**Aurora Serverless**

- Not to be confused with Aurora Provisioned (typical deployment)
- On-demand and auto scaling configuration for the Aurora DB service
- Automation of monitoring workloads and adjusting capacity for databases
- Capacity adjusted based on application demands
- Per-second billing
- Six copies of data across 3 AZs
- Good for variable workloads, new applications, capacity planning, and dev/testing needs
- Aurora Capacity Units (ACUs): measurements on how your clusters scale
- Set a min and max of ACUs for scaling requirements (can be zero)

**AWS X-Ray**

- Application Insights: collects application data for viewing, filtering, and gaining insights about requests and responses
- Downstream: view calls to downstream AWS resources and other microservices/APIs or databases
- Traces: receives traces from your applications for allowing insights
- Multiple Options: integrated services can add tracing headers, send trace data, or run the X-Ray daemon
- Concepts:
    - Segments: data containing resource names, request details, and other information
    - Subsegments: segments providing more granular timing information and details
    - Service graph: graphical representation of interacting services in requests
    - Traces: trace ID tracks paths of requests and traces collect all segments in a request
    - Tracing header: Extra HTTP header containing sampling decisions and trade ID (X-Amzn-Trace-Id)
- AWS X-Ray Daemon: UDP port 2000; sends raw segment data to the AWS X-Ray API.
- Integrations: EC2, ECS, Lambda, Elastic Beanstalk, API Gateway, SNS and SQS

**AWS AppSync**

- Robust, scalable GraphQL interface for app developers.
- Combines data from multiple sources (e.g., DynamoDB and Lambda)
- Enables data interaction for developers via GraphQL
- GraphQL: data language that enables apps to fetch data from servers

**Questions to ask to help narrow down services:**

1. Is the application right for containers?
2. Do you need those servers?
3. Is the application AWS specific?
4. How long does the code need to run?

## Security

**DDoS**

- A Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attack is an attack that attempts to make your website or application unavailable to your end users.
- Layer 4 attack
    - Syn flood: overwhelm a server with SYN packets and ignore the Syn-Ack to consume resources.
    - Amplification/reflection attacks: NTP, SSDP, CharGEN, SNMP. Send a request from a spoofed IP.
    - Example a 64 byte NTP packet, causes an NTP server to respond with up to 3,456 bytes of traffic.
- Layer 7 attack
    - a botnet sends a large number of GET or POST requests.

**CloudTrail**

- logs all API calls made to your AWS account and stores these logs in S3.

**Shield**

- Free DDoS protection (layer 3 and 4 only)
- Supports ELB, CloudFront, and R53
- AWS Shield Advanced
    - Enhanced protections
    - Always-on flow-based monitoring of network and application traffic
    - DDoS Response Team (DRT) available 24/7
    - $3k per month

**WAF**

- Blocks layer 7 attacks, SQL injections, and cross-site scripting
- 3 behaviors:
    - Allow all requests, except the ones you specify.
    - Block all requests, except the ones you specify.
    - Count the requests that match the properties you specify.
- Can block access to specific countries or IP addresses
- Define conditions with:
    - IP Address
    - Country
    - Values in request headers
    - Presence of SQL code
    - Presence of a script
    - Strings that appear in requests that match a regex

**Firewall Manager**

- Centrally secure multiple AWS accounts and resources

**GuardDuty**

- Uses AI to learn what normal behavior looks like in your account and to alert you of any abnormal or malicious behavior.
- 7-14 days to create a baseline
- 30 Days free, then charged based on amount of log data
- Looks for:
    - API calls from unknown IPs
    - Attempts to disable CloudTrail logging
    - Unauthorized deployments
    - Compromised instances
    - Reconnaissance
- Updates a database of known malicious domains using external feeds from 3rd parties
- Monitors CloudTrail logs, VPC Flow Logs, and DNS logs.
- Findings appear in the GuardDuty dashboard.
- CloudWatch Events can be used to trigger a Lambda function to address a threat.

**Macie**

- Uses machine learning and pattern matching to discover sensitive data stored in S3.
- Checks for PII, PHI, financial data, unecrypted buckets, public buckets
- Can also alert on buckets shared with your aws account outside of your org
- Good for HIPAA and GDPR and preventing identity theft.
- Macie alerts can be sent to Amazon EventBridge and integrated with your event management systems.
- Automate remediation actions using other AWS services, such as Step Functions.

**Inspector**

- Automatically assesses applications for vulnerabilities or deviations from best practices
- Two types of assessments:
    - Network assessments: checks for ports reachable outside of the vpc (no agent required)
    - Host assessments: vulnerable software (CVE), host hardening (CIS benchmarks), and best practices (agent required)
- Vulnerability scans (assessments) can be run once or weekly.
- Inspector workflow
    - Create an assessment target
    - Install agents on EC2 instances (auto installed if Systems Manager Run Command is allowed)
    - Create assessment template
    - Perform assessment run
    - Review findings against rules

**KMS and CloudHSM**

- AWS Key Management Service (AWS KMS) is a managed service that makes it easy for you to create and control the encryption keys used to encrypt your data.
- You start using the service by requesting the creation of a CMK.
- You control the lifecycle of the CMK as well as who can use or manage it.
- 3 ways to generate a CMK
    1. AWS creates the CMK for you. The key material for a CMK is generated within HSMs managed by AWS KMS.
    2. Import key material from your own key management infrastructure and associate it with a CMK.
    3. Have the key material generated and used in an AWS CloudHSM cluster as part of the custom key store feature in AWS KMS.
- 3 ways to control permission in KMS:
    1. Use the key policy. Controlling access this way means the full scope of access to the CMK is defined in a single document (the key policy).
    2. Use IAM policies in combination with the key policy. Controlling access this way enables you to manage all the permissions for your IAM identities in IAM.
    3. Use grants in combination with the key policy.Controlling access this way enables you to allow access to the CMK in the key policy, as well as allow users to delegate their access to others.

**KMS vs. CloudHSM**

- KMS
    - Shared tenancy of underlying hardware
    - Automatic key rotation
    - Automatic key generation
- CloudHSM
    - Dedicated HSM to you
    - Full control of underlying hardware
    - Full control of users, groups, keys, etc.
    - No automatic key rotation

**Secrets Manager**

- Can be used to securely store your application secrets (DB credentials, API keys, SSH keys, passwords, etc.)
- Applications use the Secrets Manager API
- When enabling rotating credentials, they are rotated immediately. 
- Configure applications to use Secrets Manage before enabling credential rotation.

**Parameter Store**

- Similar to secrets manager but it is free and has more limits.
- If you need more than 10k parameters, key rotation, or password generation via CloudFormation, use Secrets Manager instead.

Presigned URLs: used when you need to share private files in your S3 buckets.

**IAM Policies advanced concepts**

- Not explicitly allowed == implicitly denied
- Explicit deny > everything else
- Only attached policies have effect
- AWS joins all applicable policies
- AWS managed vs. customer managed

**Certificate manager**

- Used to integrate SSL certificates
- Supported services: ELB, CloudFront, API Gateway
- Free service
- Automatically renew your SSL certificates and rotate the old certificates with new certificates with supported AWS services.

**Audit Manager**

- Supports continuous auditing or automating auditing reports
- HIPAA or GPDR compliance

**Artifact**

- Download AWS audits and compliance reports
- Commonly used as a distractor

**Cognito**

- User pool: user directories that provide sign-up and sign-in options for users of your application
- Identity pool: allow your users access to other AWS services
- You can use identity pools and user pools separately or together
- Cognito process
    - Device connects to a user pool, authenticates, and gets tokens
    - Then the device connects to an identity pool and exchanges tokens for AWS Credentials
    - Next the device connects to AWS services using those credentials.

**Detective**

- Operates across multiple AWS services and analyzes the root cause of an event.
- Not to be confused with Inspector, which is an automated vulnerability management service that continually scans EC2 and container workloads for software vulnerabilities and unintended network exposure.
- Detective is a common distrator.

**Network Firewall**

- Filter network traffic before it reaches your internet gateway
- Good for if you require intrusion prevention systems or any hardware firewall requirements.

Security Hub: single place to view all your security alerts across multiple AWS security services and AWS accounts