---
title: "DevOps Foundations 4"
description: "Basic Devops Theory"
date: 2023-01-02T18:04:05-04:00
lang: en
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["DevOps"]
---

## Monitoring Basics

Core Concepts

- Monitoring is defined as the ability to observe and check the progress or quality of something over a period of time; to keep under systematic review
- Objectives
  - Problem detection
  - Troubleshooting
  - Reporting and improvement
- Targets
  - Workload: availability, performance, faults/errors
  - Resources: technical metrics
  - Business metrics
- Observability: a measure of how well the internal states of a system can be inferred from knowledge of its external outputs

Observable Monitoring Characteristics

- Self-service
- Dynamic
- Collaborative
- Holistic
- Change-aware
- Automatable

Types of measurement

- Metric: timestamp, value, metadata
- Event: defined set of conditions happens
- Diagnostic: transaction trace, thread dump, conveys deep information

Averages are poor representations of systems, use distributions and percentiles instead.

Precision

- What is its value?
- How is it sampled?
- Is it exact or aggregated?
- What is its frequency?
- What time is it from?
- What does it mean?

Integrated systems approach

- Helpful for finding bottlenecks (constraints) between systems.
- Look at systems as a whole: clients, applications, networks, databases, servers
- In the following models, monitor all three categories and identify the bottleneck.

USE model

- Utilization: percentage of time spent servicing work
- Saturation: work that can't be serviced
- Errors: error event counts

DWR Model

- Demand: user_action, API_call, request_payload
- Workload: call_stack, response_payload, software_structure
- Resources: CPU, I/O, system_limits

## Types of Monitoring Instrumentation

Synthetic monitoring

- an artificial transaction to test if your application is up.
- be careful not to generate too much load from your monitoring tool
- an example tool is <https://www.pingdom.com>
- events are programmatically generated
- usually the same request
- regular frequency
- low coverage
- adds load
- SLA friendly

Real user monitoring

- Event based from user traffic
- Varied requests
- No set frequency
- Wide coverage
- No additional load
- Many variables

Use a combination of synthetic and real user monitoring.

Instrumentation Options

1. List of instrumentation options
2. Web access logs
3. Network analysis
4. Mobile instrumentation
5. Browser injection
6. Desktop instrumentation

A common user monitoring tool is <https://steelcentral.net>

System Monitoring

- Alerts should be focused on hardware failures
- System monitoring are helpful for planning
- Big Four: CPU, Memory, Disk, Network
- Popular system monitoring tools: data dog, nagios

Splunk is a popular tool for log monitoring.

## Monitoring Technique

Good qualities in monitoring personnel

- Agents of truth
- Detectives at heart
- Pragmatic learners
- Breathe data and numbers
- Desire improving the common good
- Always willing to lend a hand

Actionable Alerting

- Test your alerts
- Instrument the real thing
- Send context

CAMS

- Culture: break the silos and enable transparency
- Automation: automate observability to scale throughout the release lifecycle
- Measurement: trust numbers and encourage precision
- Share: collaborate and make more people aware of observability best practices
