---
title: "AWS Solutions Architect Part 2"
date: 2023-04-12T19:33:59-04:00
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["AWS"]
---

This is part 2 in a series of notes to help prepare for the AWS SAA-C03 exam. It covers information about EBS, EFS, databases, VPC, Route 53, and ELB. Topics are covered at a high level. Use <https://docs.aws.amazon.com/> for more information.

## Elastic Block Storage (EBS) and Elastic File System (EFS)

Elastic Block Store

- Storage volumes you can attach to your EC2 instances.
- They are used the same way you would use any system disk:
  - Create a file system
  - Run a db
  - Run an OS
  - Store data
  - Install applications
- Used for mission critical workloads
- Automatically replicated within a single AZ
- Dynamically increase capacity and change the volume type with no downtime or performance impact to your live systems

EBS Volume Types

- SSD Options
  - General Purpose SSD (gp2 or gp3): a balance of price and performance
    - Good for boot volumes or dev and test applications that are not latency sensitive
    - gp3 is 4x faster than gp2 and cheaper
  - Provisioned IOPS SSD (io1 or io2): high-performance and most expensive
    - Good if you need more than 16k IOPS
    - Good for I/O-intensive applications, large DBs, and latency-sensitive workloads.
    - io2 is the same price as io1 and has more durability
- HDD Options
  - Throughput Optimized HDD (st1)
    - Low-cost HDD volume
    - Good for frequently accessed, throughput-intensive workloads
    - Throughput = Big data, data warehouses, ETL, and log processing
    - Cannot be a boot volume
  - Cold HDD (sc1)
    - Good for applications that need the lowest cost and performance is not a factor

IOPS vs. Throughput

- IOPS
  - Measures the number of read and write operations per second
  - Important metric for quick transactions, low-latency apps, transactional workloads
  - The ability to action reads and writes very quickly

- Throughput
  - Measures the number of bits read or written per second (MB/s)
  - Important metric for large datasets, large I/O sizes, complex queries
  - The ability to deal with large datasets

EBS Volumes and Snapshots

- Volumes
  - Exist on EBS
  - Virtual hard disks.
  - Minimum of 1 volume per EC2 instance, called the root device volume.
  - EBS volumes will always be in the same AZ as EC2.
  - You can resize EBS volumes on the fly and change volume types on the fly (e.g. gp2 to io2)
  - You must extend the filesystem in the OS after an increase

- Snapshots
  - Exist on S3
  - A point-in-time copy of the volume
  - Only the data that has been changed since your last snapshot are moved to S3.
  - Stop the instance, detach the volume, and take a snapshot for consistency.
  - If you take a snapshot of an encrypted EBS volume, the snapshot will be encrypted automatically.
  - Snapshots can only be shared in the region they were created.
  - You have to copy the snapshot to the destination region in order to share it in that region.

EBS Encryption

- Encrypts your volume with a data key using the industry-standard AES-256 algorithm.
- Uses AWS Key Management Service (AWS KMS) customer master keys (CMK) when creating encrypted volumes and snapshots.
- Encryption/Decryption is handled transparently.
- Minimal impact on latency.
- Copying an unencrypted snapshot allows encryption.
- Snapshots of encrypted volumes are encrypted.
- You can encrypt root device volumes upon creation.

Encrypted Volumes

- Data at rest is encrypted inside the volume.
- All data in flight moving between the instance and the volume is encrypted.
- All snapshots are encrypted.
- All volumes created from the snapshot are encrypted.

EC2 Hibernation

- EBS Behavior
  - If we stop an EC2 instance, the data is kept on the disk (with EBS)
  - If we terminate the EC2 instance, the root device volume will also be terminated
  - EC2 Instance Startup: OS boot > bootstrap script > applications start
- Going into Hibernation
  - When you hibernate an EC2 instance, the operating system is told to perform hibernation (suspend-to-disk).
  - Hibernation saves the contents from the instance memory (RAM) to your EBS root volume.
  - We persist the instance's EBS root volume and any attached Amazon EBS data volumes.
- Coming out of hibernation
  - The EBS root volume is restored to its previous state.
  - The RAM contents are reloaded.
  - The processes that were previously running on the instance are resumed.
  - Previously attached data volumes are reattached and the instance retains its instance ID.
- Instance boots much faster
- Benefits long-running processes
- Benefits services that take a long time to initialize
- RAM must be less than 150 GB
- Instance families must include: C3-5, M3-5, R3-5
- Available for Windows, Amazon linux 2, Ubuntu
- Can't be hibernated for more than 60 days

EFS (Elastic File System)

- Managed network file system (NFS) that can be mounted on EC2 instances.
- High availability and scalability but expensive
- Works with EC2 instances in multiple AZs
- Good for content management systems since you can share content between EC2 instances
- Good for web servers; keeps a single folder structure for your site
- Uses NFSv4 protocol
- Not supported in Windows, need a Linux-based AMI
- FS scales automatically
- Read-after-write consistency
- Pay per use; only pay for what you use
- Performance
  - Supports thousands of concurrent connections
  - Up to 10 Gbps in throughput
  - Up to Petabytes of storage
- Options
  - General purpose: web servers, cms
  - Max I/O: big data, media processing
- Storage Tiers
  - Standard: frequently accessed
  - IA: infrequently accessed

FSx Windows

- A fully managed native Microsoft Windows file system.
- Easily move your Windows-based applications that require file storage to AWS
- Built on windows server
- Runs SMB
- Supports AD users, ACL, groups, security policies, DFS namespaces and replication

FSx Lustre

- Optimized for compute-intensive workloads (HPC, machine learning, Media data processing workflows, electronic design automation)
- With Amazon FSx, you can launch and run a Lustre file system that can process massive datasets at up to hundreds of GB per second of throughput, millions of IOPS, and sub-millisecond latencies.

Exam Tips

- EFS: Good for when you need distributed, highly resilient storage for Linux instances
- FSx for Windows: Good for when you need centralized storage for Windows-based applications, such as SharePoint, Microsoft SQL server, Workspaces, IIS web server, and native microsoft applications
- FSx for Lustre: Good for when you need high-speed, high-capacity distributed storage for applications that do HPC, financial modeling, etc. FSx for Lustre can store data directly on S3.

Amazon Machine Image (AMI)

- Provides the information required to launch an EC2 instance
- AMIs are region specific, and must be copied to other regions in order to be used.
- 5 parts
  - Region
  - OS
  - Architecture (x86 or x64)
  - Launch permissions
  - Storage for root device (root device volume)
- Backed by either Amazon EBS or Instance Store
- EBS: the root device for an instance launched from the AMI is an EBS volume created from an EBS snapshot
- Instance Store: the root device for an instance launched from the AMI is an instance store volume created from a template stored in S3

Instance Store vs EBS

- Instance Store Volumes
  - Ephemeral storage
  - Cannot be stopped
  - If the underlying host fails, you lose your data
  - You can reboot without losing data
  - If you delete the instance, you lose the instance store volume

- EBS volumes
  - Can be stopped
  - Reboot and not lose data
  - Root device volume will be deleted on termination.
  - You can tell AWS to keep the root device volume with EBS volumes.

AWS Backup

- Consolidate backups across multiple AWS services
- Can be used with AWS organizations to back up multiple AWS accounts
- Centralized control across all AWS services with a single console
- Automated backup schedules and lifecycle and retention policies
- Improved compliance due to encryption at rest and in transit and a consolidated console.

## Databases

Relational Databases and RDS

- Data is organized into tables.
- Rows include the data items
- Columns include the fields
- Relational Database engines: SQL, Oracle, MySQL, PostgreSQL, MariaDB, Amazon Aurora
- All 6 of these can be RDS types and configured as Multi-AZ, Aurora is always multi-az.
- Online transaction processing (OLTP)
  - Processes data from transactions in real time (e.g., customer orders, banking transactions, payments, and booking systems).
  - OLTP is all about data processing and completing large numbers of small transactions in real time.
  - Use RDS for OLTP
- Online analytical processing (OLAP)
  - Processes complex queries to analyze historical data (e.g., analyzing net profit figures from the past 3 years and sales forecasting).
  - OLAP is all about data analysis using large amounts of data as well as complex queries that take a long time to complete.
  - Use Redshift for OLAP

Multi-AZ

- An exact copy of your production DB in another AZ
- Used for disaster recovery
- In the event of a failure, RDS will automatically fail over to the standby instance.

Read Replica

- A read-only copy of your primary DB in the same AZ, cross-AZ, or cross-region.
- Used to increase or scale read performance.
- Great for read-heavy workloads and takes the load off your primary DB for read-only workloads (such as business intelligence reporting jobs).
- Requires automatic backup
- Multiple read replicas are supported (up to 5 to each DB instance)
- Common reasons for read replica
  - Scaling beyond the compute or I/O capacity of a single DB instance for read-heavy workloads.
  - Serving read traffic while the source DB instance is unavailable (data on the read replica may be stale).
  - Business reporting or data warehousing scenarios.

Amazon Aurora

- Amazon's relational database engine is compatible with MySQL and PostgreSQL.
- Combines the speed and availability of commercial databases with the simplicity and cost-effectiveness of open-source databases.
- 5x better performance than MySQL, 3x more than PostgreSQL
- Starts at 10 GB. Scales in 10 GB increments. Up to 128 TB
- Compute can scale up to 96 vCPUs and 768 GB of memory
- 2 copies of your data are contained in each AZ with a minimum of 3 AZ (6 copies of your data).
- You can lose 2 copies of data without affecting write availability.
- You can lose 3 copies of data without affecting read availability.
- Data blocks and disks are continuously scanned for errors and repaired automatically.
- Automated backups are always enabled.
- Snapshots are available.
- You can share Aurora snapshots with other AWS accounts.
- Aurora Serverless: autoscaling configuration based on application need; good for infrequent, intermittent, or unpredictable workloads.

Dynamo DB

- fast and flexible nosql database
- fully managed
- supports both document and key-value data models
- stored on SSD
- spread across 3 geographically distinct data centers
- eventually consistent read (default): copies of data is usually reached within a second
- strongly consistent reads (opt in): returns a result that reflects all writes
- Pay-per-request
- No minimum capacity
- Pay more per request than with provisioned capacity
- Supports kms, site-to-site vpn, vpc endpoints, directconnect, iam policies and roles, fine-grained access, cloudwatch and cloudtrail

ACID for Databases

- Atomic: all changes to the data must be performed successfully or not at all
- Consistent: data must be in a consistent state before and after the transaction
- Isolated: no other process can change the data while the transaction is running
- Durable: the changes made by a transaction must persist

DynamoDB Transactions (ACID)

- DynamoDB transactions provide developers ACID across 1 or more tables within a single AWS account and region.
- You can use transactions when building applications that require coordinated inserts, deletes, or updates to multiple items as part of a single logical business operation.
- ACID is all or nothing

DynamoDB Backups

- Full backups at any time
- No impact on performance or availability
- Retained until deleted
- Same region as source table
- Point in Time Recovery (PITR):
  - Protects against accidental writes or deletes
  - Restore to any point in the last 35 days
  - Incremental backups
  - Not enabled by default

DynamoDB Streams and Global Tables

- Streams: time-ordered sequence of item-level changes in a table
- Global Tables
  - Managed multi-master, multi-region replication
  - Good for globally distributed applications
  - DynamoDB streams must be enabled
  - Multi-region redundancy for disaster recovery or high availability
  - No application rewrites
  - Replication latency under 1 second

MongoDB and DocumentDB

- MongoDB is a nosql database engine;
- Amazon DocumentDB allows you to run MongoDB on the AWS cloud.
- It's a managed db service that scales with your workloads and safely and durably stores your db information.
- Good for when you have a mongodb instance that you want to move to the cloud without refactoring.
- You no longer have to worry about:
  - Manual tasks when running MongoDB workloads
  - Cluster management software
  - Configuring backups
  - Monitoring production workloads

Cassandra and Keyspaces

- A distributed database (runs on many machines) that uses NoSQL.
- Primarily used for big data solutions.
- Enterprises, such as Netflix, use Cassandra on their backend.
- Keyspaces is Amazon's Apache Cassandra db service.
- Fully managed and serverless.

Graph Databases using Neptune

- A graph database stores nodes and relationships instead of tables or documents
- Neptune is Amazon's graph db service.
- Use cases:
  - Build connections between identities
  - Build knowledge graph applications
  - Detect fraud patterns

Ledger Databases and QLDB

- A ledger db is a nosql db that is immutable, transparent, and has a cryptographically verifiable transaction log that is owned by one authority.
- You cannot modify a record in a ledger db. Updates add new records to the db.
- Common use: cryptocurrencies, shipping companies, pharmaceutical companies
- Amazon Quantum Ledger Database (QLDB) is amazon's ledger db service.
- Use Cases
  - Store financial transactions
  - Reconcile supply chain systems
  - Maintain claims history
  - Centralize digital records

Time-Series data and Amazon Timestream

- Data points that are logged over a series of time, allowing you to track data.
- Examples: temperature readings, IoT sensors, Analytics (web traffic)
- Timestream DB service used for time-series data

## Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) Networking

VPC Overview

- A VPC is a logically isolated part of AWS Cloud where you can define your own network.
- Consists of internet gateways (or virtual private gateways), route tables, network access control lists, subnets, and security groups
- 1 subnet is always in 1 availability zone.
- VPC Features
  - Launch instances into a subnet of your choosing
  - Assign custom IP address ranges in each subnet
  - Configure route tables between subnets
  - Create an internet gateway and attach it to our VPC
  - Much better security control over your AWS resources
  - Subnet network access control lists (NACLs); can be used to block specific IP addresses
- Default vpc
  - Comes with every AWS account
  - All subnets in the default VPC have a route out to the internet
  - Each EC2 instance has both a public and private IP address

Build a VPC

- These steps created a public and private subnet, an internet gateway, and a route table with a public route.
- VPC > Your VPCs > Create VPC
  - Add name
  - Add a manual IPv4 CIDR `10.0.0.0/16`
  - Click create VPC
- The route table is created but no subnets are associated yet.
- Creating subnets > select the VPC you just made > select an availability zone
  - Subnet name `10.0.1.0/24 - us-east-1a` (You can put any name, it's helpful to have information in the name)
  - IPv4 CIDR 10.0.1.0/24
- Create another subnet (one subnet will be public, one will be private)
  - Subnet name `10.0.2.0/24 - us-east-1b`
  - IPv4 CIDR 10.0.2.0/24
- When you create a subnet, 'Auto assign public ipv4' will be set to 'no'.
- For the 10.0.1.0 subnet, click edit and click the checkbox for auto assign public ipv4
- Next we need to add an internet gateway to make public subnet internet reachable
- Create the IGW and give it a name, once created attach it to the created VPC.
- Only 1 internet gateway per VPC
- Next create a route out, go to route tables > click create route table
- Edit routes > 0.0.0.0/0 > target = igw you created > save
- Associate the public subnet with the Internet route table.
- Create an EC2 instance to test.
- Edit the security group to allow specific traffic.

NAT Gateways

- Enables instances in a private subnet to connect to the internet or other AWS services while preventing the internet from initiating a connection with those instances.
- Redundant inside the AZ
- Starts at 5 Gbps and scales currently to 45 Gbps
- No need to patch
- Not associated with security groups
- Automatically assigned a public IP address

Security Groups

- Security groups are stateful
- If you send a request from your instance, the response traffic for that request is allowed to flow in regardless of inbound security group rules.
- Responses to allowed inbound traffic are allowed to flow out, regardless of outbound rules.

Network ACLs

- Optional layer of security for your VPC that acts as a firewall for controlling traffic in and out of one or more subnets.
- Adds another layer of security to your VPC
- Your vpc automatically comes with a default network ACL, and by default it allows all outbound and inbound traffic.
- You can create custom network ACLs. By default, each custom network ACL denies all inbound and outbound traffic until you add rules.
- Each subnet in your VPC must be associated with a network ACL. If you don't explicitly associate a subnet with a network ACL, the subnet is automatically associated with the default network ACL.
- Block IP addresses using network ACLs, not security groups.
- You can associate a network ACL with multiple subnets; however, a subnet can be associated with only 1 network ACL at a time. When you associate a network ACL with a subnet, the previous association is removed.
- Network ACLs contain a numbered list of rules that are evaluated in order, starting with the lowest numbered rule.
- Network ACLs have separate inbound and outbound rules, and each rule can either allow or deny traffic.
- Network ACLs are stateless; responses to allowed inbound traffic are subject to the rules for outbound traffic (and vice versa).

VPC Endpoints

- Enables you to privately connect your VPC to support AWS services and VPC endpoint services powered by PrivateLink without requiring an internet gateway, NAT device, VPN connection, or AWS Direct Connect connection.
- Traffic between your VPC and the other service does not leave the Amazon network and do not need a public IP.
- Endpoints are virtual devices.
- Two types of endpoints:
  - Interface endpoints: elastic network interface with a private IP address
  - Gateway endpoints: a virtual device you provision. Supports S3 and DynamoDB

VPC Peering

- Connect 1 VPC with another via a direct network route using private IP addresses.
- Transitive peering is not supported between VPCs (using a VPC as an intermediary between two other vpcs). You must create a new direct connection between VPCs.
- No overlapping CIDR address ranges.
- You can peer between regions.

PrivateLink

- Two ways to open services between VPCs: open the VPC to the internet or use VPC peering
- The best way to expose a service VPC to tens, hundreds, or thousands of customer VPCs is to use PrivateLink
- PrivateLink doesn't require vpc peering
- No route tables, NAT gateways, internet gateways, etc.
- Requires a network load balancer on the service vpc and an ENI on the customer VPC

VPN CloudHub

- If you have multiple sites, each with its own VPN connection, you can use AWS VPN CloudHub to connect those sites together.
- Works on a hub and spoke model.
- Traffic is encrypted and uses public internet

Direct Connect

- Dedicated network connection from on-prem to AWS.
- Reduce network costs
- Increase bandwidth throughput
- Provide a more consistent network experience
- Two types:
  - Dedicated connection: physical ethernet connection associated with a single customer. Requested through Direct Connect console, CLI, or API
  - Hosted connection: physical ethernet connection that an AWS direct connect partner provisions on behalf of a customer

Transit Gateway

- Connects VPCs and on-premises networks through a central hub.
- Simplifies your network and puts an end to complex peering relationships.
- Acts as a cloud router in that each new connection is only made once.
- Allows transitive peering between thousands of VPCs and on-premises data centers.
- Works on a hub-and-spoke model.
- Works on a regional basis, but you can have it across multiple regions.
- You can use it across multiple AWS accounts using resource access manager.
- Works with Direct Connect as well as VPN connections.
- Supports IP multicast (not supported by any other AWS service)

AWS wavelengths

- Embeds AWS compute and storage services with 5G networks
- Provides mobile edge computing infrastructure for developing, deploying, and scaling ultra-low-latency applications

## Route 53

Route 53 Overview

- Amazon's DNS service that supports IPv4 and IPv6
- The last word in a domain name is referred to as the 'top level domain'.
- Top-level domains are controlled by IANA.
- Registrars are authorities that can assign domain names. AWS is a registrar.
- Route 53 allows you to host public and private zones for public and private IPs respectively.
- Record Types:
  - SOA (start of authority)
    - The name of the server that supplied the data for the zone
    - The admin of the zone
    - The current version of the data file
    - The default number of seconds for the TTL file on resource records
  - NS: Direct traffic to content DNS servers that contain the authoritative DNS records (finds where the DNS information is stored).
  - A: IPv4 to name
  - AAAA: IPv6 to name
  - MX: mail exchange; shows where emails for a domain should be routed to.
  - CNAME: resolves one domain name to another
  - Alias: AWS record to map resource record sets in your hosted zone to load balancers, cloudfront distributions, or S3 buckets configured as websites.
- TTL: The length in seconds that a DNS record is cached on either the resolving server, or the user's local pc.
- Always choose an alias record over a cname record in exam questions.

Routing Policies

1. Simple: one record with multiple IPs; Route 53 returns all values to the user in a random order
2. Weighted
    - Create health checks on your resources
    - Failed health checks remove the record until it passes
    - You can set SNS notifications to alert you about failed health checks
    - Create a new record and set a differentiator (example 30, this will send 30% of traffic to that record)
    - Reduce TTL to 60
    - Record ID can just be a name for the record
    - Create a record for each public IP and add the weights and health checks you created
    - The total should come out to 100
    - In the exam if you're asked to route DNS traffic to specific regions, think of weighted routing.
3. Latency-based: route dns traffic based on the lowest network latency for your end user.
4. Failover: used to create an active/passive setup
    - Choose Primary or Secondary for failover record type
5. Geolocation: Choose where your traffic will be sent based on the geographic location of your users.
    - Choose your location (continent, country, etc)
6. Geoproximity (traffic flow only): uses a combination of location, latency, and availability
    - You can specify a bias, which expands or shrinks the size of a geographic region from which traffic is routed to a resource.
    - Can be complicated to setup.
    - Must use Route 53 traffic flow, to use geoproximity routing
7. Multivalue answer: return multiple values in response to DNS queries

## Elastic Load Balancing (ELB)

ELB Overview

- Automatically distributes incoming application traffic across multiple targets, such as EC2 instances.
- Can be done across multiple AZs.
- 3 Types of Load Balancers
  - Application: intelligent
  - Network: performance
  - Classic: test/dev
- There is a 4th type of load balancer called Gateway Load Balancer. It's very niche and used for layer 3, 3rd party virtual appliances. Not covered on the exam.
- All AWS load balancers can be configured with health checks.
- Health checks periodically send requests to load balancers' registered instances to test their status.
- The status of any instances that are unhealthy at the time of the health check is OutOfService.
- Requests are routed to healthy instances only.

Application Load Balancers

- Layer 7 Load Balancing
- Only support HTTP and HTTPS
- Listeners: checks for connection requests from clients using the protocol and port you configure.
- Rules: determine how the lb routes requests to its registered targets. Each rule consists of a priority, one or more actions, and one or more conditions.
- Target Groups: each target group routes requests to one or more registered targets, such as EC2 instances, using the protocol and port number you specify.

Network Load Balancers

- Layer 4 Load Balancing
- Best for TCP traffic with extreme performance needs. Handles millions of requests per second with ultra-low latencies.
- After the load balancer receives a connection request, it selects a target from the target group for the default rule.
- It attempts to open a TCP connection to the selected target on the port specified in the listener configuration.
- No rules, unlike Application Load Balancers
- Protocols: TCP, TLS, UDP, TCP_UDP
- Ports: 1-65535
- Basically any port and any protocol
- Supports protocols not supported by Application Load Balancers.
- Can decrypt traffic, but you need to install the certificate on the load balancer.

Classic Load Balancers

- Legacy load balancers, layer 7
- Can use layer 7 specific features such as X-Forwarded and sticky sessions.
- Can also use layer 4 load balancing for apps that rely purely on TCP.
- X-Forwarded-For: request header used to see the original IP address of the client (instead of the load balancer that is forwarding the request)
- Error 504: the application is having issues (gateway timeout) but the load balancer is up; troubleshoot the web server or database

Sticky Sessions

- Allows you to bind a user's session to a specific EC2 instance.
- This is useful for storing information locally to that instance.
- Can result in a situation where you remove an EC2 instance from a pool, but the LB still directs traffic to that EC2 instance.

Deregistration Delay

- Allows LB to keep existing connections open if the EC2 instances are de-registered or become unhealthy.
- This enables the LB to complete in-flight requests made to instances that are de-registering or unhealthy.
- You can disable deregistration delay if you want your load balancer to immediately close connections to the instances that are de-registering or have become unhealthy.
- Set the value to 0.
