---
title: "AZ 900 Study Guide Part 4"
description: "Notes from A Cloud Guru"
date: 2022-12-12T18:04:05-04:00
lang: en
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["Azure"]
---

## 1. Cloud Concepts

Basics

- Cloud computing - the on demand availability of computer system resources split into 3 main categories: compute, networking, storage.
- Cloud benefits - low cost, ease of adoption, unlimited resources
- High availability - hardware is replaced instantly in the event of a failure; use clusters
- Reliability - aka fault tolerance/disaster recovery; the ability of a system to recover from failures and continue to function; two strategies: deploy in multiple locations, no single point of failure
- Scalability - the process of adding more resources on an as-needed basis; two types of scaling: Out (horizontal) and Up (vertical). Scaling out is adding more resources. Scaling up is making current resources bigger.
- Elasticity - scaling up and down automatically as needed.
- Predictability - refers to two ideas: performance and cost; performance = consistent experience for customers regardless of traffic. cost = tracking and forecasting resource costs in real time.
- Security - controlling your cloud environment; patching, maintenance, network control, permissions, etc
- Governance - standardized environments, regulatory requirements, auditing for compliance
- Manageability - two concepts: management of the cloud (autoscaling, monitoring, templated deployments) and management in the cloud (portal, cli, api)

Capex vs Opex

- Capital expenditure - money spent by a business on acquiring or maintaining fixed assets (land, buildings, equipment, etc)
- Operational expenditure - money spent on the cost of running a business that are reoccuring monthly, quarterly, annually; the cost of creating a product, day-to-day costs
- Consumption-based pricing is a pricing model that let's you pay only for what you use.

Cloud Service Models

- IaaS - hosted IT infrastructure (vms and servers, networks, physical buildings)
- PaaS - includes infrastructure and also tools and middleware (such as db management tools)
- SaaS - includes infrastructure and tools, and the app itself and provides a managed service.
- FaaS - serverless; Azure functions; Allows a function of code to be run without having to configure and manage the server

IaaS - VM, VNet, Storage

- Org has complete control of the infrastructure
- Dynamic and flexible
- Cost varies depending on consumption
- Highly scalable
- Multiple users share a single piece of hardware

PaaS - App Services, Azure CDN, Cosmos DB

- Resources are virtualized and can easily be scaled up or down as needed
- Services often assist with the development, testing and deployment of apps
- Multi-user access via the same development application.
- Integrates web services and db

SaaS - Microsoft 365

- Managed from a central location
- Hosted on a remote server
- Accessible over the Internet
- Users not responsible for hardware or software updates
- Rate limiting/QoS

Azure Marketplace

- Azure app store that includes 3rd party solutions and services
- Can be integrated from the portal, cli, or powershell

Cloud Architecture

- Public - no purchase of hardware; monthly fees; no control, no physical access
- Private - complete control of infrastructure; managed internally
- Hybrid - combining public and private clouds; can be complex but avoids outages and disruptions

Common Scenarios for IaaS, PaaS, SaaS

- IaaS: Lift-and-shift migration, Testing and development
- PaaS: Development framework, Analytics or business intelligence
- SaaS: Email and messaging, Business productivity applications, Finance and expense tracking

## 2. Azure Architecture

Regions

- a set of datacenters deployed within a latency-defined perimeter and connected through a dedicated regional low-latency network.
- more than one data center, relatively close to each other, connected by fiber

Choosing a region

- location: as close as possible to users
- features: some regions are missing features
- price: service prices differ by region
- paired regions: regions are paired (except for Brazil south); if the primary region has an outage, you can failover to the secondary region

Availability Zones

- physical location within a region, that has its own power/cooling/networking. 3 per region.

Resource Groups

- a container for resources
- Each resource can only exist in a single resource group
- You can add or remove resources from a group at any time
- You can move resources between groups
- A single group can contain resources in different regions
- Can grant access to it
- Resources can interact across groups
- Resource groups have a location and region since it stores meta data about resources in it

Azure Resource Manager

- controls all actions on resources.
- Benefits
  - group resource handling
  - consistency
  - dependencies
  - access control
  - tagging
  - organized billing (via tagging)

## 3. Compute

Virtual Machines

- Part of IaaS
- Azure portal allows you to manage large numbers of VMs
- Azure blueprints allows your vm to comply with company guidelines
- Azure will give recommendations to ensure better security, availability, and performance
- Can run a variety of OS
- Calculated hourly, more resources = more money

When to use:

1. You need to control all aspects of an environment or machine.
2. You need to install specific applications on your windows or linux machines.
3. You have existing infrastructure that needs to move to Azure

When not to use:

1. There is another Azure service that meets the same goal (VMs are expensive)
2. You don't have the personnel for maintenance (it requires patching and configuration)

Scale Sets

- Scale sets are identical VMs that can be activated or deactivated as needed.
- A baseline VM for the scale set ensures application stability. A baseline VM is what you copy to make up the scale set VMs.
- As resource usage increases, more VMs are activated to take the load.
- You only pay for the VM, storage and networking resources you use. No cost attached to the scale set function.

App Services

- Is an easy way to host and manage your web application
- App services are a PaaS offering on Azure
- Web Apps are used to host web sites and web applications.
- Web Apps for Containers can host your existing container images.
- API Apps can host your data backend services. (No graphical front end)

Azure Container Instances

- All the dependencies for an application are included in the container.
- VMs require maintenance and updates. Containers don't have any components relating to the OS that require maintenance.
- Apps running in containers can be deployed to multiple different operating systems and hardware platforms.
- Development, deployment and maintenance are all more efficient when using containers.
- Scaling and patching is much simpler.
- Containers are consistent.

Azure Kubernetes Service

- Kubernetes is an open-source container orchestration system for automating application deployment, scaling, and management
- Open source: public code base with community involvement
- Orchestration: tracks the moving parts of a system; makes sure containers are correctly configured to work together.
- Automatic application deployment: deploy containers automatically as needed (such as increased demand)
- Monitoring to determine the load.
- Key features of Azure Kubernetes Service
- You can replicate container architectures
- Standard azure services like IAM and elastic provisioning are included
- Global reach: you can use regions, or use on-prem with Azure Stack
- ACR Azure Container Registry: keeps track of valid container images, manages files and artifacts for containers, feeds container images to ACI and AKS
- uses azure identity and security features

Windows Virtual Desktop

- You can reuse windows 10 licenses
- Concurrency: multiple users can use the same VM instance
- Use windows 10/11 on any device with an Internet browser
- Secure data - use azure storage to secure your data

Azure Functions

- What is a function?
- Smallest compute service on Azure
- A single function of compute
- Called, or invoked, via a standard web address (URL)
- Runs once and stops
- No maintenance, processes, or anything VM related
- Function Benefits?
- Only runs when needed, saves money, and doesn't affect other function instances if it fails

## 4. Networking

Virtual Network

- VNET or virtual networks are a fundamental part of your azure infrastructure.
- An address space is a range of IP addresses you can use for your resources
- A subnet is a smaller network, which is part of your VNet. Use these for security and logical division of resources.
- A VNet is in a single region and single subscription
- VNets in the cloud can scale, have high availability and isolation.

Load Balancer

- What is a load balancer? A service that distributes new inbound flows that arrive on the load balancer's frontend to backend pool instances, according to rules and health probes.
- Inbound flows: traffic from the Internet or local network.
- Frontend: the gateway for the load balancer. All traffic goes here first.
- Backend pool: the vms receiving the traffic.
- Rules & health probes: checks to ensure the backend instance can receive the data.
- Scenarios for using load balancers:
- Balance the load of network traffic (either Internet or local)
- Port forwarding
- Outbound traffic: allow outbound connectivity for backend pool VMs

VPN Gateway

- Securely communicate between Azure and On-prem resources
- 3 components to a VPN Gateway:
  1. Azure Gateway Subnet
  2. A tunnel
  3. On-premises gateway
- VPN gateways are instrumental in a hybrid cloud architecture
- A VPN gateway is a specific VNet gateway. It consists of two or more dedicated VMs.
- VNet Gateway + "vpn" becomes a VPN Gateway
- Sends encrypted data between Azure and on premises network.

Application Gateway

- Allows you to load balance but instead of using IP/Port, it uses parts of an HTTP request (URI paths, Host headers, etc.)
- Traffic from a specific web address can go to a specific machine.
- Is a fit for most other Azure services.
- Supports auto-scaling, end-to-end encryption, zone redundancy and multi-site hosting.

Content Delivery Network

- CDN: a distributed network of servers that can deliver web content close to users.

ExpressRoute

- A private connection to Azure (does not go over the public Internet)
- The conditions for ExpressRoute are: you have on-prem and azure data, the data is periodically migrated, and HA is required.

## 5. Storage

Overview

- Storage account = Unique azure namespace
- Every object in Azure has its own web address

Blob

- Blob = binary large object (any type of data)
- Blob storage is ideal for storing data for backup and restore, disaster recovery, and archiving.
- Storage account > container > blob
- Blob Types:
  - Block: text and binary data up to 4.7 TB
  - Append: optimized for append operations (log data)
  - Page: files up to 8 TB. Any part of the file could be accessed at any time, for example a virtual hard drive.
- Pricing tiers:
  - Hot: low access times, high cost
  - Cool: lower cost, higher access times (data remains here for 30 days)
  - Archive: lowest cost, highest access times

Disk

- Standard HDD: spinning drive, low cost and suitable for backups
- Standard SSD: standard for production. Higher reliability, scalability, and lower latency over HDD.
- Premium SSD: super fast and high performance. very low latency. use for critical workloads.
- Ultra Disk: for the most demanding, data-intensive workloads. Disks up to 64TB

File

- Benefits of Azure File storage:
  - Improved sharing
  - Hardware and OS is managed
  - Network and power outages don't affect storage
- Scenarios:
  - Hybrid: supplement or replace your existing on-premises file storage
  - Lift and shift: move your existing file storage and related services to Azure

Archive

- Lowest price
- Good for policy and legal requirements
- Free up premium storage
- Secured
- Good for infrequently accessed data

Storage Redundancy

- Azure storage always creates multiple copies of your data
- It's automatic, keeps 3 copies, and is invisible to the end users.
- 4 Options for multiple redundancy: LRS, ZRS, GRS, GZRS
- Single region options
  - LRS: locally-redundant storage; lowest cost, basic protection, non-critical scenarios
  - ZRS: zone-redundant storage; protects against datacenter-level failures; recommended for HA
- Multi-region options
  - GRS: geo-redundant storage; failover to a secondary region
  - GZRS: Geo-zone-redundant; Combines GRS and ZRS; recommended for critical data

Moving Data

- 3 options: AzCopy, Azure Storage Explorer, Azure File Sync
- Different solutions based on: transfer frequency (occasional versus continuous), data size, network bandwidth
- AzCopy: cli utility useful for automating data transfers; blob and az file formats only
- Storage Explorer: GUI application; supports all storage account formats
- Azure File Sync: automatically syncs with on-prem file servers

Additional Migration Options

- Azure Data Box: too much data to transfer over the Internet; physical storage sent to your location
- Azure Migrate: migrate non-azure resources into azure (servers, DBs, apps)

Premium Performance Options

- Basics:
  - Stored on SSDs
  - Trade redundancy options for performance
- Standard general-purpose v2
  - Supports all storage and redundancy types
- Premium block blobs
  - Use case: low-latency blob storage workloads
  - Storage Type: blob
  - Redundancy Options: LRS/ZRS (single region)
- Premium page blobs
  - Use case: unmanaged virtual disk for virtual machines
  - Storage Type: page blobs
  - Redundancy Options: LRS (single zone)
- Premium file shares
  - Use case: high-performance enterprise apps that run off a file server
  - Storage Type: NFS and SMB file shares
  - Redundancy Options: LRS/ZRS (single region)

## 6. Databases

Cosmos DB

- Global from the start
- Designed to easily setup between regions
- Ensures data is synchronized and moved between regions
- Low latency
- Automatically scales to meet resource demand, any number of users supported, you only pay for resources you use
- Choose from various SDKs and APIs
- Different languages supported (C#, Java, Node.js)
- Integrates with different platforms (SQL, MongoDB, Cassandra)

Azure SQL

- Fully managed service
- Able to migrate from on-prem to azure sql
- Built-in machine learning: optimizations and warnings
- Up to 100 TB
- Two products: Azure SQL DB, Azure SQL Managed Instance
- Azure SQL Database: traditional SQL server
- Azure SQL Managed Instance: aimed at migrating from on-prem

MySQL

- Open source
- Relational database: data in the database is connected through relations in the data itself.
- Mature and Stable
- PaaS: managed by Microsoft
- Development focus (instead of worrying about infrastructure)
- Choice of language and framework (such as PHP and Wordpress)
- HA and Security features
- Cloud capabilities: db patching, automatic backups, and monitoring
- Use cases: web apps, e-commerce, mobile apps, digital marketing, finance management, gaming

PostgreSQL

- Similar to MySQL (open source, relational db)
- Large number of extensions
- Horizontal scaling
- Fully managed

Database Migration Services

- Single tool can migrate your server
- Step-by-step guides and documentation to help you migrate
- Includes detailed guides for non-Microsoft dbs

## 7. Authentication

Identity Services

- Authentication: confirm identity
- Authorization: confirm access

Azure AD

- Manage users and permissions
- Azure AD and Active Directory are different products. Active directory was not designed for the web.
- You can't have an Azure account without an AAD service.
- Every Azure account needs a first user and this user is in the initial AAD instance.
- Tenant
  - A tenant represents the organization.
  - A tenant is a dedicated instance of AAD that an organization receives when signing up for Azure.
  - Each tenant is distinct and completely separate from other AAD tenants.
  - A user can be a member or guest of up to 500 Azure AD tenants.
- Subscription
  - All resources within a subscription are billed together.
  - You can have multiple subscriptions within a tenant to separate costs.
  - If a subscription isn't paid, all the resources and services associated with the subscription stop.
- Azure AD is part of the broader Microsoft Entra product family.
- Microsoft Entra includes Azure AD, Permissions Management, and Verified ID

Zero Trust Concepts

- Traditional security models had a trusted perimeter and a level of trust for devices within the corporate network.
- This creates problems with remote model networks and VPNs
- Zero trust means all users are assumed untrustworthy unless proven otherwise
- Trust is proven by identity
- Assign users just enough permissions to do their job
- Zero trust = Trusted identities, not location

MFA

- Providing at least 2 ways to prove your identity
- Something you know (username, password)
- Something you have (phone)
- Something you are (biometric)

Conditional Access

- Authentication protection with the use of if/then policies
- If the user meets this policy (signal) they are granted access (decision)
- Signal can be: being a specific user, being a member of a group, using a specific application, having a location (by IP), using an approved device
- Decision can be: grant, block, require mfa
- Common access scenarios:
  - enforce mfa for all users
  - block sign-ins using legacy protocols

Passwordless Authentication

- Increase convenience while staying secure
- 3 methods for passwordless
  - Microsoft authenticator app
  - Windows Hello (facial recognition)
  - FIDO2 Security Key (hardware key)

External Guest Access

- Two options for collaborating with external users:
  - Create separate org account for the external user (they have to manage two accounts)
  - Invite the external user to the Azure tenant (B2B collaboration, external user uses existing account)
- You can invite a variety of account types (identity providers such as MS, Google, Facebook)
- Assign permission for the guest account: Principle of least privilege; Azure AD and Azure subscription perms are different
- Optional: assign guest user to application
- Optional: apply cross-tenant conditional access policy (for MFA or setting approved devices)

Azure AD DS

- Providing compatibility for older applications to use modern cloud services
- Management Protocols that are ideal: Group Policy, NTLM, and Kerberos
- Some solutions:
  - Continue using on-prem AD and sync to Azure AD with Azure AD Connect
  - Configure AD server on Azure VM (self-managed AD DS)
  - Managed service called Azure AD DS
- How Azure AD DS works:
- Two windows domain controllers are paired for high-availability
- No need for OS config or management
- Must create a unique namespace/domain name (Ex: aadds-companyname.com)
- Standalone domain, not an extension of on-premises AD domain
- One-way sync from Azure AD to Azure AD DS (synchronize users, groups, and creds)
- Azure AD may also bidirectional sync with on-prem AD

SSO

- One username and password to sign onto multiple applications.
- Service name: 'Azure Active Directory Seamless Single Sign-On'

## 8. Azure Solutions

IoT

- IOT Hub: collect data feeds for all your devices
  - PaaS offering that is managed and secure, provides ease of deployment, scaling and authentication
  - Provides more control over IoT data collection and processing
- IOT Central: SaaS that speeds up the implementation of your IoT solution
  - No coding needed, pre-made connectors
- Azure Sphere: all in one solution for IOT devices
  - Only specific hardware is permitted
  - Specialized security service
  - Custom made OS

Big Data

- Data lake analytics: large amounts of data and parallel processing
- HDInsights: similar to Azure data lake but with open source frameworks (Apache hadoop, Spark, and Kafka)
- Databricks: Based on spark, a distributed cluster-computing framework
- Run and process a dataset on many computers simultaneously
- Provides all the computing power
- Integrates with other Azure Storage services
- Azure Synapse Analytics: Azure's data warehouse offering
- Formerly Azure SQL Data Warehouse
- Used for reporting and data analysis
- Synapse SQL language to manipulate the data
- Provides speed, efficiency, cost reduction, better decision making, new products and services

Machine Learning

- Microsoft has 3 main parts to how ML is done on Azure
- Models: the definition of what your ml application is learning. A model is a set of rules of how to use the data provided. The model finds patterns based on the rules.
- Knowledge mining: Use Azure Search to find existing insights in your data such as file relationships and geography connections.
- Built-in Apps: Azure has built-in apps like cognitive services and bot services
- Azure Bot Service: PaaS offering that lets you build bots for Q&A services, virtual assistants and more
  - Create a bot using the visual editor or programming
  - Let users talk to your bot with natural language and speech integration.
  - Integrate with other services (FB, Messenger, Teams, Twilio)
  - Use your own branding and you own the data the bot uses and produces
- Azure cognitive services:
  - Vision: ID and caption videos and images automatically
  - Decision: apps make decisions based on content
  - Speech: speech to text transcription
- Machine learning studio: visual tool used for ML; supports all ML tools
- ML services: end-to-end service, tooling, and automation

Serverless

- You don't manage the servers.
- Azure Functions: a single task is performed every time. Runs once each time it is invoked.
- Basic compute unit and can run millions of times per second if needed.
- Logic Apps: connect systems, schedule and automate tasks and processes, no coding required.
- Event Grid: routing service for sending and receiving events between applications

DevOps

- Tools to provide faster development
- Azure boards: project tracking, tasks, timelines
- Azure pipelines: test software automatically and continuously
- Azure repos: store source code
- Azure test plans: design tests of applications to implement automatically
- Azure artifacts: share applications and code libraries
- Azure DevTest Labs: allow devs and engineers to create environments for test and development
- Won't incur unexpected costs and even minimizes waste of resources on your account
- Templates: tailor your development and test environments and reuse them with templated deployments
- Github and Github actions: same as Azure Repos and Azure Pipelines but more popular since it came first. Purchased by Microsoft in 2018.

## 9. Security

Defense in Depth

- Providing multiple layers of security to protect infrastructure and services
- Physical > Identity and Access > Perimeter > Network > Compute > Gateway + Firewalls > Data

Securing Network Connectivity

- Firewalls define rules for what kind of traffic can and cannot access the device or service behind it.
- Can be hardware or software and suit any type and size of network.
- DDoS Protection Service: detects the DDoS attack and deflects; various levels of protection depending on the scenario
- Network Security Group (NSG): personal resource firewall; attach a vnet, subnet, or interface.
- A NSG determines who can access the resources attached to it, using rules for inbound and outbound traffic.
- Application Security Group: focuses the security on the application rather than the IP endpoint.
- Group VMs and vnets into logical application groups and apply an application security group.

Public and Private Endpoints

- Public endpoints = PaaS reachable over the public Internet
- 2 Solutions: service endpoints and private endpoints
- Service Endpoints: privately connect VNet subnet to Azure PaaS services
- Direct connection, over Microsoft private backbone
- Limitations:
  - Secure access to VNets only (no private on-prem access, must allow on-prem access over public IP)
  - PaaS public endpoint still exists
  - Service endpoints provide access to an entire service (can be too broad of a scope)
- Private endpoints: managed network interface that provides a private connection to a specific instance of a service (single storage account, SQL instance, etc.)
- Available over connected networks (hybrid and peered virtual networks)
- Can completely disable public access to a connected service

Microsoft Defender for Cloud (formerly Azure Security Center)

- Portal in Azure that provides threat alerts
- Each VM has an agent installed that sends data
- Azure analyzes the data and alerts you if necessary
- Provides a security score, policy and compliance metrics
- Integrates with other SIEM (requires Azure Arc)
- Alerts for resources that aren't secure
- Using Defender for Cloud:
- Set up policies for Azure to monitor resources. A policy is a set of rules used to evaluate a resource. Use predefined policies or create your own.
- Actively protect your resources through monitoring your policies and their outcomes.
- Respond to any security alerts. Investigate all of them and then go back to step 1 to define new policies to account for the alert.
- Streamline compliance with the regulatory compliance guidelines.
- Resource Security Hygiene: defender for cloud recommendations to improve configurations

Azure Key Vault

- Store passwords and secrets
- Secure Hardware: microsoft can't access it
- App isolation: can't pass on secrets nor access another application's secrets
- Global Scaling

Azure Information Protection

- Classify data: done through policies or manually
- Track activities: monitor events on shared data and revoke access if needed
- Share data: control who edits, views, prints, and forwards it
- Integration: controls for document access is integrated with appllications and tools (like MS Office)

Microsoft Defender for Identity (formerly Advanced Threat Protection)

- Monitor users: activity, permissions, and group membership
- Baseline behavior: alert for suspicious activity outside of an established baseline
- Suggest changes: recommendations for security best practices

Azure Sentinel

- Azure SIEM

1. Data collection
2. Aggregation and Normalization
3. Analysis and Threat Detection
4. Internal processes
5. Take Action

- Features:
- Behavioral analytics with AI
- AWS integration
- Fast due to scale

Azure Dedicated Hosts

- Full physical server you get control over
- Provisioned like a vm in the azure portal

## 10. Monitoring

Governance

- Azure Policy ensures that policies applied to resources are compliant.
- A policy is a set of rules to ensure compliant resources.
- Role based access control RBAC ensures user compliance through assigning a role to a user.
- A role is a combination of security principal, role definition, and scope.
- Locks make sure that subscriptions, resource groups, or resources are either not modified or not deleted.
- Blueprints are templates for creating standard Azure environments.
- The Azure Advisor for Security Assistance is part of the Security Center.

Azure Monitor

- Helps you find resources that aren't performing 100%
- Both On-Prem and Azure services can feed information into Azure Monitor.
- Azure Monitor is centralized and fully managed.
- You can analyze all data from one place.
- Full access to an interactive query language to learn about telemetry data.
- Predict and recognize problems faster with built-in machine learning.

Monitoring Tools

- Log Analytics: store and query data from Azure monitor
- Kusto Query Language (KQL) is the name of the query language that Log Analytics uses.
- Application Insights: performance insights for web applications; vms require an agent; performance bottlenecks and user activity
- Azure Monitor Alerts: notifications in response to unexpected events
  - Components
  - Alert Rule: resource, telemetry, conditions to trigger, severity
  - Action Group: email/sms targets

Azure Service Health

- Track incidents with your services in real time and get a report afterwards
- Set up custom alerts to notify you of any outages, planned or otherwise

Compliance

- GDPR, ISO and NIST are regulations and standards to ensure compliance with applicable legislation.
- Azure Compliance Manager provides recommendations, tasks to assign team members, a compliance score, secure document storage and reports.
- Azure Government Cloud provides dedicated datacenters to US Government bodies. Compliant with US federal, state and local requirements.
- Azure China region contains all data and datacenters within China. Complies with all applicable Chinese regulations.

Privacy

- Azure information protection: classify, label, and protect data based on sensitivity
- Azure policy: define and enforce rules
- Guides
- Compliance manager
- Microsoft Privacy Statement

Trust

- Trust Center: Microsoft's documentation on products and services
- Service Trust Portal: audit reports

Azure Arc

- Manage azure and non-azure resources in the same interface
- Centralized governance
- Installs an agent
- Scenario: You have on-prem and Azure resources that need Azure Blueprints and Azure Policy applied. Use Azure Arc

## 11. Pricing

Subscription

- All resources belong to a subscription
- You can have multiple subscriptions to help organize who pays for what
- A billing admin manages everything billing related on Azure
- A billing cycle on Azure is either 30 or 60 days.
- Offer type is the type of subscription (such as pay-as-you-go or free trial)
- Management groups allow you to make changes to subscriptions in bulk.
- You can manage access, compliance, and policies.

Cost Management

- You can manage costs by using free accounts.
- Azure Cost Management can be used to visualize spending.
- Spot VM
  - Save money by using unused capacity.
  - The VM can be evicted at any time.
  - Use for interruptible non-critical workloads.
  - Use with Azure scale sets.
  - Set a max price for the Spot VM.

Pricing Factors

- Influences on pricing
  - Resource Size
  - Resource Type
  - Region Location
  - Bandwidth: defined by 3 billing zones, same zone data is free (ingress), data between zones is charged (egress)
- Pricing calculator: calculate monthly estimates and export to a spreadsheet
- Total Cost of Ownership Calculator: Estimate savings over time

Best Practices

- Spending Limits
- Quotas: limits on resources (can be changed by request)
- Tags: non-functional labels you attached to resources
- Common tag usage:
  - Define which roles can access a resource
  - Group related resources
  - Filter resources per project, customer, or for reporting
- Pay as you go versus Reserved Instances (not all services can be reserved)
- Reserved Capacity (1 or 3 year committment)
  - 80% Azure SQL
  - 65% Synapse Analytics or Cosmos DB
  - 55% Redis Cache
- The Advisor portal gives you best practices advice in general through recommendations.
