---
title: "AWS Solutions Architect Part 1"
date: 2023-04-12T18:04:05-04:00
categories: ["Notes"]
tags: ["AWS"]
---

This is part 1 in a series of notes to help prepare for the AWS SAA-C03 exam. It covers information about the exam, AWS fundamentals, IAM, S3, and EC2. Topics are covered at a high level. Use https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ for more information.

## Exam Guide

**There are four domains covered in the exam.**

1. Design Resilient Architectures 26%
1. Design High-Performing Architectures 24%
1. Design Secure Architectures 30%
1. Design Cost-Optimized Arcitectures 20%

**Design Resilient Architectures**

- Design a multi-tier architecture solution.
- Design highly available and/or fault-tolerant architectures.
- Design decoupling mechanisms using AWS services.
- Choose appropriate resilient storage.

**Design High-Performing Architectures**

 - Identify elastic and scalable compute solutions for a workload.
 - Select high-performing and scalable storage solutions for a workload.
 - Select high-performing networking solutions for a workload.
 - Choose high-performing database solutions for a workload.

**Design Secure Architectures**

 - Design secure access to AWS resources.
 - Design secure application tiers.
 - Select appropriate data security options.

**Design Cost-Optimized Architctures**

 - Identify cost-effective storage solutions.
 - Identify cost-effective compute and database services.
 - Design cost-optimized network architectures.

**Exam Details**

- 65 questions
- 130 minutes
- Passing score 750

## AWS Fundamentals

**Need to know services for the exam**

- AWS Global Infrastructure
- Analytics
- Management & Governance
- Migration & Transfer
- Compute
- Application Integration
- Security, Identity & Compliance
- Network & Content Delivery
- Storage
- Containers
- AWS Cost Management
- Databases

**AWS Global Infrastructure**

- Regions: a geographical area consisting of a minimum of 3 availability zones
- Availability Zones: one or more discrete data centers with redundant power, networking, and connectivity in an AWS Region
- Edge Locations: endpoints for AWS that are used for caching content, used for CloudFront (CDN)

**Shared Responsibility Model**

- Can you do the given task in the AWS Management Console? If yes, you're responsible.
- Customer Responsibility (security IN the cloud)
    - Customer Data
    - Platform, Applications, IAM
    - OS, Network, Firewall configuration
    - Client-side data encryption & data integrity authentication
    - Server-side encryption (FS and/or Data)
    - Networking Traffic Protection (encryption, integrity, identity)

- AWS Responsibility (security OF the cloud)
    - Software
    - Compute, Storage, Database, Networking
    - Hardware/AWS Global Infrastructure
    - Regions, Availability Zones, Edge Locations

**Key Services**

- Compute: EC2, Lambda, Elastic Beanstalk
- Storage: S3, EBS, EFS, FSx, Storage Gateway
- Databases: RDS, DynamoDB, Redshift
- Networking: VPCs, Direct Connect, Route 53, API Gateway, AWS Global Accelerator

**Well-Architected Framework**

- *Operational Excellence*: running and monitoring systems to deliver business value, and continually improving processes and procedures
- *Performance Efficiency*: using IT and computing resources efficiently
- *Security*: protecting information and systems
- *Cost Optimization*: avoiding unnecessary costs
- *Reliability*: ensuring a workload performs its intended function correctly and consistently when it's expected to
- *Sustainability*: minimizing the environmental impacts of running cloud workloads

## Identity and Access Management (IAM)

**Securing the root account**

- The root account is the email address you used to sign up for AWS.
- The root account has full administrative access to AWS.
- Best practice is to: enable MFA, never share the password or access keys, and use a strong password.
- Some tasks can only be performed by the root user.
    - Change account settings
    - Restore IAM user permissions
    - Activate IAM access to the Billing and Cost Management console
    - Close your AWS account
    - Register as a seller in the Reserved Instance Marketplace
    - Configure an Amazon S3 bucket to enable MFA
    - Edit or delete an SQS or S3 resource policy that denies all
    - Sign up for AWS GovCloud
    - Request AWS GovCloud account root user access keys from AWS Support
    - If AWS KMS becomes unmanageable, you can recover it by contacting AWS Support as the root user

**IAM Policy Document**

- Permissions are assigned using IAM policy documents
- The elements included in a policy document that make up the "EAR" are effect, action, and resource.
- Policy Documents can be applied to: users, groups, and roles
- Best practice is to NOT apply policy documents to users
- Instead apply the policy document to a group and add that user to the group
- An explicit deny will always override an allow.
- Policy Document Allow All Example
```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": "*",
            "Resource": "*"
        }
    ]
}
```

**Permanent IAM Credentials**

- Users: a physical person
- Groups: functions, such as administrator, developer, etc; contains users
- Roles: internal usage within AWS; one part of aws accesses another part of aws
- Best practice is for users to inherit permissions from groups
- These user credentials don't automatically rotate, making them "permanent" without manual human interaction.
- PowerUserAccess - a policy that grants administrator rights, except they can't create users/groups
- To create federation to Active Directory with IAM, go to identity providers > SAML > and configure the connection

**Exam Tips**

- IAM is Universal: it does not apply to regions at this time.
- New users have no permissions when first created.
- Access key ID and secret access keys are not the same as usernames and passwords.
- You only get to view these once. If you lose them, you have to regenerate them. Save them in a secure location.
- Always set up password rotations. You can create and customize your own password rotation policies.
- IAM Federation: you can combine your existing user account with AWS.
- For example, when you log on to your PC (usually using Microsoft AD), you can use the same credentials to log in to AWS if you set up federation.
- Identity Federation: uses the SAML standard (integrates with AD).

## Simple Storage Service (S3)

**S3 Basics**

- Object-based storage allows you to upload files
- Files can be from 0 bytes to 5 TB
- Files over 5 GB must use Multi-Part upload.
- Not suitable to install an OS or run a DB on.
- The total column of data and the number of objects you can store is unlimited.
- Files are stored in buckets, there are no directories.
- Folders are just for UI, there are no actual folders.
- All AWS accounts share the S3 namespace, therefore each bucket name must be globally unique.
- Example S3 URLs: https://`bucket-name`.s3.`Region`.amazonaws.com/`key-name`

**S3 Object Components**

- Key: the object name, the full path; composed of prefix and object name
- Prefix: s3://my-bucket/`my_folder1/my_folder2/`my_file.txt
- Object name: s3://my-bucket/my_folder1/my_folder2/`my_file.txt`
- Value: the data itself, which is made up of a sequence of bytes
- Version ID: allows you to store multiple versions of the same object; disabled by default
- Metadata: data about the data you are storing (e.g., content-type, last-modified, etc.)
- Tag: Unicode key/value pair; up to 10; useful for security/lifecycle/billing

**S3 Security**

- User-Based
    - IAM Policies: determines which API calls should be allowed for a specific user from IAM
- Resource-Based
    - Bucket Policies: bucket wide rules from the S3 console (allows cross account)
    - Object ACL: finer grain control on an individual object level
    - Bucket ACL: less common
    - Both Object ACL and Bucket ACL can be disabled.
- An IAM principal can access an S3 object if:
    - The user IAM permissions ALLOW it
    - Or the resource policy ALLOW it
    - AND there's not explicit DENY

**Making an S3 bucket public**

- By default it is difficult to make an S3 bucket public since it is a security vulnerability
- Allow individual file to be public:
    - S3 > Buckets > Bucket name > Permissions > Block Public Access > Uncheck the box
    - In permissions > Object ownership > ACLs enabled > Acknowledge checkbox > save changes
    - Back to the bucket contents > select the file > Actions > "Make public using ACL"

**Hosting a static website**

- The bucket must be public, edit the bucket policy rather than making each file public
- Go to "Edit static website hosting"
- Select enable > host a static website > index.html > error.html > save
- Upload the objects
- Example bucket policy (Update the ARN)
```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Sid": "PublicReadGetObject",
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Principal": "*",
            "Action": [
                "s3:GetObject"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::BUCKET_NAME/*"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

**JSON Policy Components**

- Resources: buckets and objects
- Effect: allow or deny
- Actions: set of API to allow or deny
- Principal: the account or user to apply the policy to

**Exam Tips**

- When you create an S3 bucket, it is private by default (including all objects within it).
- You have to allow public access on both the bucket and its objects in order to make the bucket public.
- Object ACLs: You can make individual objects public using object ACLs. 
- Bucket policies: You can make entire buckets public using bucket policies.
- HTTP: status code: When you upload an object to S3 and it's successful, you will receive an HTTP 200 code.
- Static Content: Use S3 to host static content only (not dynamic).
- Automatic Scaling: S3 scales automatically with demand.

**Versioning Advantages**

- All versions of an object are stored in S3. This includes all writes and even if you delete an object.
- Can be a great backup tool.
- Once enabled, versioning cannot be disabled, only suspended.
- Can be integrated with lifecycle rules.
- Can support multi-factor authentication.

**S3 Storage Classes**

- S3 Standard
    - High Availability and Durability
    - Designed for Frequent Access
    - Suitable for Most Workloads
    - The default storage class
    - Use cases: websites, content distribution, mobile and gaming apps, and big data analytics
- S3 Standard-Infrequent Access (S3 Standard-IA)
    - Used for data that is accessed less frequently but requires rapid access when needed.
    - You pay to access the data
    - Low per-GB storage price and a per-GB retrieval fee
    - Use cases: long-term storage, backups, and as a data store for disaster recovery files.
- S3 One Zone-IA
    - Same as S3-Standard-IA but within a single AZ.
    - Costs 20% less than S3 Standard-IA
    - Good for non-critical data
- S3 Intelligent-Tiering
    - Automatically moves your data to the most cost-effective tier based on how frequently you access each object.
    - Use case: unknown or unpredictable access patterns.

**Glacier Storage Classes**

- You pay each time you access your data.
- Use only for archiving data.
- Glacier is cheap storage.
- Optimized for data that is very infrequently accessed.
- S3 Glacier
    - Provides long-term data archiving with instant retrieval time for your data.
- Glacier Flexible Retrieval
    - Ideal storage class for archive data that does not require immediate access but needs the flexibility to retrieve large sets of data at no cost
    - Good for backup or disaster recovery use cases.
    - Can be minutes or up to 12 hours.
- Glacier Deep Archive
    - Cheapest storage class and designed for customers that retain data sets for 7-10 years or longer
    - Good for customer needs and regulatory compliance requirements.
    - Standard retrieval time = 12 hrs
    - Bulk retrieval time = 48 hrs

**Lifecycle Management**

- Automates moving objects between different storage tiers.
- Can be used in conjunction with versioning.
- Can be applied to current versions and previous versions.
- Example: S3 standard: keep for 30 days > S3 IA: after 30 days > Glacier: after 90 days
- In the S3 Buckets Menu go to Management > lifecycle rules.

**S3 Object Lock and Glacier Vault Lock**

- Use S3 Object Lock to store objects using write once, read many (WORM)
- It can prevent objects from being deleted or modified for a fixed amount of time or indefinitely
- Object lock can be on individual objects or applied across the bucket as a whole
- Object lock comes in two modes:
    - Governance mode: users can't overwrite or delete an object version or alter its lock settings unless they have special permissions. You can still grant some users permission to alter the retention settings or delete the object if necessary.
    - Compliance mode: a protected object version can't be overwritten or deleted by any user, including the root user in your AWS account. Ensures an object version can't be overwritten or deleted for the duration of the retention period.
- A retention period protects an object version for a fixed amount of time.
- A timestamp is added to the object's metadata to indicate when the retention period expires.
- After the retention period expires, the object version can be overwritten or deleted unless you also placed a legal hold on the object version.
- Legal Holds
    - S3 object lock also enables you to place a legal hold on an object version.
    - Like a retention period, a legal hold prevents an object version from being overwritten or deleted.
    - However, a legal hold doesn't have an associated retention period and remains in effect until removed.
    - Legal holds can be freely placed and removed by any user who has the `s3:PubObjectLegalHold` permission
- Glacier vault lock: you can specify controls, such as WORM, in a vault lock policy and lock the policy from future edits.
- Once locked, the policy can no longer be changed.

**Encrypting S3 Objects**

- Types of encryption
    - Encryption in Transit: to and from the S3 bucket; SSL/TLS, HTTPS
    - Encryption at Rest: Server-Side Encryption
        - SSE-S3: S3-managed keys using AES 256-bit encryption
        - SSE-KMS: AWS Key Management Service-managed keys
        - SSE-C: Customer-provided keys
    - Encryption at Rest: Client-Side Encryption
        - You encrypt the files yourself before you upload them to S3.
- Enforcing Server-Side Encryption
    - Console: select the encryption setting on your S3 bucket. The easiest way is just a checkbox in the console.
    - Bucket Policy: You can also enforce encryption using a bucket policy.
- A bucket policy can deny all PUT requests that don't include the `x-amz-server-side-encryption` parameter in the request header.

**Optimizing S3 performance**

- S3 prefixes are the folders and subfolders within your S3 bucket.
- The more prefixes you use, the better your performance
- You can achieve a high number of requests: 3,500 PUT/COPY/POST/DELETE and 5,500 GET/HEAD requests per second, per prefix.
- You can get better performance by spreading your reads across different prefixes.
- For example, if you are using 2 prefixes, you can achieve 11,000 requests per second.
- If you are using SSE-KMS to encrypt your objects in S3, remember KMS limits.
- Uploading/downloading will count toward the KMS quota.
- Region-specific, however it's either 5,500, 10,000, or 30,000 requests per second.
- Currently, you cannot request a quota increase for KMS.
- Use multipart uploads to increase performance when uploading files to S3.
- Should be used for any files over 100 MB and must be used for any file over 5 GB
- Use S3 byte-range fetches to increase performance when downloading files to S3.

**S3 Replication**

- You can replicate objects from one bucket to another.
- Must enable versioning in source and destination buckets.
- CRR: cross-region replication
- Good for compliance, lower latency access, and replication across accounts
- SRR: same-region replication
- Good for log aggregation and live replication between prod and test accounts
- Buckets can be in different AWS accounts
- Copying is asynchronous
- Must give proper IAM permissions to S3
- After you enable replication, only new objects are replicated
- You can replicate existing objects using S3 batch replication
- Delete markers are not replicated by default
- You can enable delete marker replication in the replication policy under management
- Delete markers created by S3 deleted operations will be replicated.
- Delete markers created by lifecycle rules are not replicated.
- No chain replications
    - Allowed: A -> B and A -> C
    - Not Allowed: A -> B -> C

## Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)

EC2 is like a VM, hosted in AWS instead of your own data center.

**Pricing Options**

- On-Demand: Pay by the hour or the second, depending on the type of instance you run.
    - Flexible: Low cost and flexibility of Amazon EC2 without any upfront payment or long-term commitment.
    - Short-Term: Applications with short-term, spiky, or unpredictable workloads that cannot be interrupted.
    - Testing the Water: Applications being developed or tested on Amazon EC2 for the first time.
- Reserved: Reserved capacity for 1 or 3 years. Up to 72% discount on the hourly charge.
    - Predictable usage: applications with steady state or predictable usage.
    - Specific capacity requirements: applications that require reserved capacity.
    - Pay up front: you can make upfront payments to reduce the total computing costs even further.
    - Standard RIs: up to 72% off the on-demand price
    - Convertible RIs: up to 54% off the on-demand price. Has the option to change to a different RI type of equal or greater value
    - Scheduled RIs: launch within the time window you define. Match your capacity reservation to a predictable recurring schedule that only requires a fraction of a day, week, or month.
    - Operate at a regional level.
    - Commit to 1 or 3 years.
    - Not only EC2, includes serverless technologies like Lambda and Fargate
- Spot: Purchase unused capacity at a discount of up to 90%. Prices fluctuate with supply and demand.
    - Applications that have flexible start and end times.
    - Applictions that are only feasible at very low compute prices.
    - Useful when you don't need persistent storage.
    - Examples: big data, containerized workloads, CI/CD, high-performance computing (HPC), test and dev workloads
    - Users with an urgent need for large amounts of addtional computing capacity.
    - Examples: Image rendering, genomic sequencing, algorithmic trading engines
    - Start by deciding your max spot price in a spot request.
    - The instance will be provisioned as long as the spot price is equal or below the max price.
    - Hourly spot price depends on capacity and region.
    - Once the spot price goes above the max, you have 2 min to stop or terminate your instance.
    - Spot blocks keep spot instances running even if they exceed the max price.
    - You can set spot blocks between 1 to 6 hours.
    - To delete persistent stop requests, you need to cancel the spot request and terminate the instances.
    - Spot Fleet: a collection of spot instances and (optionally) on-demand instances.
    - Spot fleets will try and match the target capacity with your price restraints.
    - Spot fleets strategies:
        - `capacityOptimized` The spot instances come from the pool with optimal capacity for the number of instances launching.
        - `diversified` The spot instances are distributed across all pools
        - `lowestPrice` The spot instances come from the pool with the lowest price. Default strategy
        - `InstancePoolsToUseCount` The spot instances are distributed across the number of spot instance pools you specify. Must be used in combination with `lowestPrice`.
- Dedicated: A physical EC2 server dedicated for your use. The most expensive option.
    - Compliance: regulatory requirements that may not support multi-tenant virtualization.
    - Licensing: great for licensing that does not support multi-tenancy or cloud deployments (per-socket, per-core, per-VM, etc)
    - On-Demand: can be hourly (expensive)
    - Reserved: can be purchased as a reservation for up to 70% off the on-demand price.
    - Any question that talks about special licensing requirements, use dedicated hosts.

**AWS Command Line**

- ec2 instances automatically install the aws command line
- use `aws configure` to add your key
- use `aws s3 ls` to view your s3 buckets
- use `aws s3 mb s3://name-of-bucket` to create an s3 bucket
- When you create a user select "programmatic access"
- The secret access is only available once. If you need it again, you must generate a new key. Run aws configure again.
- Never share key pairs
- Supported on Linux, Windows, and MacOS
- Least privilege: always give your users the minimum amount of access required to do their job.
- Use groups: Create IAM groups and assign your users to groups. Group permissions are assigned using IAM policy documents. 

**IAM Role**

- A role is an identity you can create in IAM that has specific permissions.
- A role is similar to a user, as it is an AWS identity with permission policies that determine what the identity can and cannot do in AWS.
- Instead of being uniquely associated with one person, a role is intended to be assumable by anyone who needs it.
- Roles are temporary
- A role does not have standard long-term credentials the same way passwords or access keys do.
- Instead, when you assume a role, it provides you with temporary security credentials for your role session.
- Roles can be assumed by people, AWS architecture, or other system-level accounts.
- Roles can allow cross-account access.
- This allows one AWS account the ability to interact with resources in other AWS accounts.
- Roles are preferred from a security perspective.
- Roles allow you to provide access without the use of access key IDs and secret access keys.
- Policies control a role's permissions
- You can update a policy attached to a role, and it will take immediate effect.
- You can attach and detach roles to running EC2 instances without having to stop or terminate those instances.

**Security Groups**

- Security groups are virtual firewalls for your EC2 instance.
- In order to be able to communicate to your EC2 instances via SSH/RDP/HTTP, you will need to open up the correct ports.
- Bootstrap scripts: A script that runs when the instance first runs
    - Add this under Advanced Details > User Data > As Text > Paste your script into the text box.
- Changes to security groups take effect immediately.
- You can have any number of EC2 instances within a security group.
- You can have multiple security groups attached to EC2 instances.
- All inbound traffic is blocked by default.
- All outbound traffic is allowed.

**EC2 Metadata**

- EC2 metadata is simply data about your EC2 instance.
- This can include information such as private IP address, public IP address, hostname, security groups, etc.
- You can retrieve metadata with `curl http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data/`
- This returns a list of options you can use to get more information.
- Example: `curl http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data/public-ipv4`
- User data = bootstrap scripts
- You can view the bootstrap script that was run by using ``curl http://169.254.169.254/latest/user-data/``

**Networking with EC2**

- You can attach 3 different types of virtual networking cards to your EC2 instances
- ENI: elastic network interface; basic, day-to-day networking
    - Create a management network
    - Use network and security appliances in your VPC
    - Create dual-homed instances with workloads/roles on distinct subnets
    - Create a low-budge, high-availability solution
- EN: enhanced networking; uses single root I/O virtualization (SR-IOV) to provide high performance.
    - High-performance networking between 10 Gbps to 100 Gbps
    - Single root i/o virtualization (SR-IOV) provides higher i/o performance and lower CPU utilization
    - Provides high bandwidth, high pakcet per second (PPS) and lower inter-instance latencies
    - Two types of EN: Elastic network adapter (ENA) or Intel 82599 virtual function (VF) interface
    - ENA: supports up to 100 Gbps
    - VF: supports up to 10 Gbps; used on older instances
    - Always choose ENA over VF
- EFA: elastic fabric adapter; accelerates high performance computing (HPC) and machine learning applications
    - A network device you can attach to your EC2 instance to accelerate High Performance Computing (HPC) and machine learning applications.
    - Provides lower and more consistent latency and higher throughput than the TCP transport traditionally used in cloud-based HPC systems.
    - Can use OS-Bypass: enables HPC and machine learning applications to bypass the OS kernel and communicate directly with the EFA device. Not supported with Windows, only Linux.

**Placement Groups**

- Cluster: grouping of instances within a single AZ
    - Good for applications that need low network latency, high network throughput, or both.
    - Only certain instance types can be used
- Spread: instances are placed on distinct underlying hardware
    - Individual critical EC2 instances
    - Good for applications that have a small number of critical instances that should be kept separate from each other.
    - Example: separating production and staging databases.
- Partition: each partition placement has its own set of racks (separate network and power).
    - Multiple EC2 instances: HDFS, HBase, and Cassandra
    - Good for isolating the impact of hardware failure.
- Exam Tips
    - A cluster placement group can't span multiple AZs, whereas a spread placement group and partition placement group can.
    - Only certain types of instances can be launched in a placement group (compute optimized, GPU, memory optimized, storage optimized)
    - AWS recommends homogenous instances within cluster placement groups.
    - You can't merge placement groups.
    - You can move an existing instance into a placement group. Before you move the instance, the instance must be in the stopped state. You can move or remove an instance using the AWS CLI or an AWS SDK, but you can't do it via the console yet.

**vCenter in AWS**

- Hybrid Cloud: connect your on-premises cloud to the AWS public cloud, and manage a hybrid workload.
- Cloud Migration: migrate your existing cloud environment to AWS using VMware's built-in tools.
- Disaster Recovery: use vmware's famous disaster recovery technology on aws.
- Use AWS services to update your applications or to create new ones.
- Runs on dedicated hardware hosted in AWS using a single AWS account.
- Each host has two sockets with 18 cores per socket, 512 GiB RAM, and 15.2 TB Raw SSD storage.
- Each host is capable of running multiple VMware instances (hundreds)
- Clusters can start with two hosts up to a maximum of 16 hosts per cluster.
- This solution is ordered through VMware.

**AWS Outposts**

- Extend AWS services to your data center.
- Sizes include 1U and 2U servers up to 42U racks and multi-rack deployments.
- Outposts Rack: 42U rack up to 96 racks; large deployments
- Outposts Servers: 1U or 2U servers; small deployments
- Benefits:
    - Hybrid Cloud
    - Fully managed infrastructure
    - Consistency via AWS management console, APIs, and SDKs
- Process:
    - Order: via AWS management console
    - Install: AWS staff come on-site to install hardware
    - Launch: AWS management console can now launch instances
    - Build: create your own environment